Article title: How to Steal Game Ideas (Without Copying)
Author/Speaker: Payne Robinson
Date: 2026/02
Source Url: https://youtu.be/dXuhtXnv6qU?si=AB4V3_2RykX0xRJO

This is going to be a pretty nuanced take on how to strategically steal ideas from other games because a big thing that I'm always telling people to do is to go play more games. So, here's my take on that. First things first, let's check out Jonas Tyroller. A lot of this is based on his fantasy theory. Now, if you've never heard his fantasy theory, he tells people that when you're coming up with game ideas, you want to come up with the fantasy first. And the reason why you want to do this is because when you're trying to make games that end up making money, you do need to think about the audience a little bit. Now, if you don't care about making money, that's totally fine. I'm not saying that you need to be thinking about how to make money. I think if you care most about making money, you should just go clone stuff. But I'm coming at this from kind of a middle angle where it's like if you want to be an artist that makes enough money to pay the bills, you kind of need to think about your audience a little bit so that you can plan to have some sort of stable income while also building a cool fantasy that you like. And this fantasy theory that Jonas talks about kind of allows you to have the best of both worlds where you come up with a fantasy that you think is interesting. So, for instance, the fantasy to be a vampire bank robber. That's a cool fantasy. Vampires are cool. Robbing banks is cool. And this fantasy allows you to one to sell it because if you say, "Hey, I'm making a game about being a vampire bank robber." People can instantly understand that and go, "Oh, cool. That sounds like a cool fantasy I want to be a part of." And you have something that you can go off of. Now, the being a vampire bank robber can be maybe a turn-based strategy game. It could be a management game. It could be a first-person game. It can be a stealth game. It can be an action game. It can be so many different things. But I think a lot of people start off with mechanics first instead of a fantasy. And it leads them to a place like this. So, this is a stupid example, but it's very simple on purpose. So, if we go mechanics first, you could say, "I'm gonna make a cute bunny platformer." You've got a little bit of a fantasy there. Maybe some people like cute bunnies, but it's just super generic. I'm going to make a platformer. Or as you can see here, having the fantasy, I want to make a game where you feel like the cutest bunny alive. Now, it's like, all right, maybe you're making a visual novel. Maybe you're doing something like in Roblox where it's like a dress to impress thing where you're dressing up different bunnies. But if you start with cute bunny platformer or anytime you start with mechanics, you're automatically kind of nailing yourself down to a specific way of doing something. And if you start with the fantasy, you start with the audience in mind and then you can kind of adjust what the game is to fit what you want to make once you have got something that you think people will respond to. So this might not matter to you, but this is something worth thinking about is the sizes of fantasies. Every single fantasy that you have is going to have some sort of market cap. So there there's probably like I've got my examples here. This is a huge fantasy. cheating at poker to win big is the fantasy that that Balacho or Baltatro fulfills. Lots of people have wished somewhere at some time that they could cheat at cards or they could cheat at a casino and and win, right? That this is a huge fantasy that millions of people have and this is part of why Baltatro was exciting to people. That's the fantasy that this sells. You can cheat at poker. Cool. That's that's what got me into it is I was like, man, I've always kind of wanted to cheat at poker and win. And this entire game is built around cheating at poker on purpose. That's a really cool, really effective, really potent fantasy that a ton of people have. Smaller fantasy. Again, I don't really care about mass appeal. None of this is to be like, "Hey, here, make your game mass appeal." It's just like people are like, "Why didn't my game sell? It was really good." And it was like, you got to pick a fantasy that people actually resonate with if you want people to play your game. My fantasy is about ending the world in a really kind of gory, horrific way. This is a smaller audience. Not as many people want to do that, but there's still an audience for it. It's still a fantasy that people respond to. If I wanted to go bigger, I would think of bigger fantasies, but I just like making games that make me enough money to keep making more games. So, if you care about the audience size or the fantasy size, this is something to think about. If you don't, don't worry about it. Just make sure that you're picking something that resonates with somebody in the world or there will be nobody out there to buy it. Now, recently I was watching the GameDev Dream podcast. Jonas Tyroller was was on there and he was talking about this this fantasy theory that he had, but he said it in a way that kind of helped me understand it a little bit better because you might be like, "All right, cool. Fantasies, I don't really get it. Like, what is a fantasy?" When we're talking about it in terms of fantasies, it kind of puts the ball in your court. You're standing in your own dev's shoes and you're like, "All right, how do I sell this world that I'm making up and you can kind of be like, I'm going to create a world where you're a toilet and you're shooting people with poop and and that's the fantasy I want to sell. How do I sell this now?" So, I didn't really like this about the thinking about it as a fantasy, but he recently said, "Think about fantasies as as cravings as cravings that people have when they're looking for games. People go to play video games and they kind of have these cravings in the back of their head that they that they want fulfilled somehow and when they see a game that fulfills that craving that that is the fantasy kind of meeting and and letting something happen. So this kind of puts you in other people's shoes instead of being like how do I make up this crazy fantasy and sell it to people you start thinking what are people craving? And for me, cuz I play a ton of video games, I can kind of rely on my own perspective a lot of the time. And so I'll just be thinking about what am I craving? What kind of games have I not seen made? That was part of the reason why I made Execute is cuz I was like, I like Plague Inc., but I wanted it to be more violent. And that's part of why I made this game. I missed the really awful, dark, weird, edgy games from the early 2000s. And this is what I was craving. And I was like, if I'm craving it, surely somebody else out there is craving it. And sure enough, 30,000 people are definitely craving that. So, be thinking about cravings that you have, especially if you are a gamer, cuz that's where you can find some of these fantasies. And just super helpful to mine your own brain for that as well. All right. So, I thought it would be helpful to have kind of a case study for this to to have some sort of fantasy that I showcased. This is this is the stealing part. Okay. Okay, so if you were like, "When are we going to get into stealing?" This is how we're going to steal. All right, I'm actually making a game right now that is stealing this fantasy. And here are some of the things I looked at when trying to make this game. Okay, here is the fantasy. Control giant machinery. All right, and you might be like, "What the heck does that even mean? Controlling giant machinery? What are you talking about?" If you've ever seen one of these sitting around or even or even one of these things, like these exist, these are so popular at every park, right? And maybe you don't care about digging. Maybe you're somebody who's like, "Yeah, whatever. Cool. Digging. Who cares? That's for stupid boys who want to be construction workers." I don't care. There's there's some part in people where they enjoy big machines. They're cool. And I mean that's part of the reason why this toy exists in the first place is because that craving exists and these are so popular. So like right now this is a fantasy that I can see if there's already toys being made about it. This is a fantasy that people like. But this whole game is about controlling a giant planetary artillery gun inside of this cockpit with all of these fun levers and gadgets. So, you're literally sitting inside of this thing the way you would sit inside of this thing, controlling all these buttons, hitting all these these different things, reading this radar, doing the whole machine simulator thing, but you're doing it in a in a fantastical way that's not quite as fantastical as this, but still like you're you're in the future doing working a machine that doesn't actually exist in real life. Also very cool. So, here's this this fantasy control giant machinery. So then what do we steal? All right, I don't think you should clone these games. I don't think you should say, "All right, Armored Core 6, I'm going to make a mech game now where you do this exact same thing." I think this is where people mistake. They're like, "All right, I'm going to go clone this idea that clearly worked. All right, Farming Simulator, I'm going to go make my own Farming Simulator." No, like you can see that this is influenced by this. Farming simulator is influenced by PVK or or P sorry, PVKK is influenced by things like Farming Simulator. But they evolved it. They were like, let's make up our own machine. And I can even show you later. Actually, I might as well just show you right now. This is a game that I'm working on called Grid Tweaker, where you are controlling. Eventually, this computer is going to be a big window that kind of looks out like PVKK where you're dropping these huge objects onto this big power grid and you're using it to make money. And I don't know when this game's going to come out. Don't use this as an advertisement, but I was just trying to show you kind of the the difference of of how you can take that fantasy and kind of warp it and be inspired by it. So, again, don't clone stuff. Don't steal the whole game. Don't steal the art. Don't steal the IP, right? Steal the the friction solutions. So, I know that in PVKK here, if you look in Farming Simulator, there is some friction in just understanding how the machines work because in real life, it's it's not always just intuitive. But I know in an interview that I watched with Jonas Tyroller talking to the head at BIP and Bits, they were like, "We want to make everything in here extremely intuitive so that you understand exactly what things do." Like right now, I've never played the game, but I bet you if you start cranking this wheel, it's going to turn this uh artillery cannon. And I bet you if we can find a big red button, can't tell if that's a bell or a button, but that'll probably fire the cannon, right? So, like, steal that, steal that perspective from the game and put that perspective in your game and be like, I'm going to take that design philosophy. If I'm going to make a giant machine game, I'm going to make sure that it's very intuitive to understand. Okay, let's take a look other stuff. Upgrade structures. So, I know if you saw one of the thumbnails, a lot of a lot of incremental games use upgrade structures like this. So, if you're making an incremental game, slight sidebar, you know, maybe you steal the tree thing. I didn't do that in execute cuz I didn't think it was that important, but like I didn't do it because I thought it was a bad idea. I just didn't do it cuz I didn't feel like doing it. There's a lot of freaking upgrades here, right? This is how these games are made. I don't think stealing a skill tree and making your game with a skill tree is going to make your game less fun for some reason. So, steal the upgrade structure. Steal the mission loops. Steal the currency systems. Like, steal the things that that aren't the focus of the game. Steal the things that have already been solved, right? Like this is part of why I talk about playing more games because as you get exposed to more games, you get exposed to mission loops. Like you don't have to reinvent the mission loop wheel. You can just take Armored Core 6 has a mission loop structure that's very similar to lots of racing games. I'm not saying they stole it from racing games, but like this is a good mission structure system. They could have gone and made up something completely weird and random that people wouldn't have understood as easily and the game wouldn't have sold as well because it would have been harder to to understand and get into. So, this is what I'm talking about. When I tell people to play more games, you're stealing the language. You're becoming more familiar with the language of video games and understanding what things like a mission loop or an upgrade structure have been solved already. We don't need new ways to do these things. If like I was saying in execute, I don't have a I don't have a skill tree. These are my skill trees. Okay, they're just buttons that you that you click on. And the reason why I did that is because personally for me, I think skill trees, they get a little overwhelming. I don't know what the hell I'm upgrading anymore. I don't think that they're that fun. And so I was like, I want to see exactly what I'm upgrading for every machine right there next to every machine. And that's how I decided to do it. So again, I'm not telling you that you have to go steal all the best ways that everybody's doing stuff, but it you go and you play lots of games and you decide to steal things or not steal things based on your own experiences or the experience you've seen with other players. I'm not saying I made like a crazy innovation, but like I changed this on purpose because I had also seen lots of incremental games with skill trees and I was also like, you know what, I just want to do it differently and just see what happens. Maybe if this game had a skill tree, maybe it would have sold better. I don't know. But I also don't think it matters that much because it's it's kind of a side thing. It's more about the fantasy. Let's take a look at the next thing. So, we already kind of talked about some of this stuff, but here are some of the things that you could steal from these games if you're trying to make a game about controlling giant machinery. So from farming sims, we could take the clear machinery interact inter interaction patterns, meaning the farming tractors pull stuff across fields. That is clear. Maybe you could design a game where the the intent of a machine is very clear and you can take that from Farming Simulator. I'm sure there's more. I haven't really played Farming Simulator, so I couldn't think of that many more, but like if you play these games, you can steal stuff from them. Armored Core, you can take the mission structure from this. There's one currency in this game. I love that. I I the more games that I play that have one currency where you're using that one currency to kind of upgrade everything, the more I'm like, "God, why do I even bother with crafting systems? This is great. Single currency systems just takes away so much friction when it comes to building upgrade systems." So, this is in a lot of games, but maybe you played Armored Core 6. It's already in this machine fantasy. You're like, "It already works here. I'm just going to take a single currency economy system and steal that. I'm getting deep here. Like, this is the type of stuff I'm saying that you should steal. Don't go make a mech game. Steal the currency economy from the mech game, right? The upgrade loop between runs. The upgrade loop here is about putting parts on your mech and kind of balancing the stats, how much power or how much weight that you have. That's a really cool system that you could put into a racing game even. It is in a lot of racing games, actually. So, you could steal that and put it into a different machinery system. Maybe I'm giving somebody ideas right now. Here, the tactile controls, all the UI is diagetic, which means all of the controls and the things that you're interacting with to make stuff happen are fully realized in the world. They're tactile. That's really cool. Visual complexity that is intuitive. We already talked about this. Just all this stuff making sense as soon as you look at it. I think that's important. I think that's cool. Lastly, we already talked about upgrade systems, but these are some other things that you should steal. Settings menus. Don't reinvent the wheel. Unless it's like something funny that you're trying to do, like maybe you're trying to do some sort of fun Undertale thing where, you know, the save system kind of messes with you if you try to reload your saves. Fine. Do a fun original thing on that if you'd like. But like, don't put menus in places people aren't expecting them. UI conventions like like having a tab system. That's fine. I know a lot of people don't like the tab system. That's fine. But like go steal some UI conventions from things that people do like. Maybe you see I' I've seen a lot of people in Assassin's Creed games. They don't like the the mouse controlled user interface. So if you see that and you're like people don't like the mouse controlled user interface on console. When you release a game on console, don't steal that user interface convention right in main menus. pretty much solved at this point. Okay. Also, all these things are places because they are solved. You could use to to be kind of fun. Like if you look at Signnalis or I can't think of any other examples right now, but like there's main menus that are super fun and interesting because they've been solved for so while you can kind of dunk on people because you can do something really fun with these mechanics. I guess you would call these all mechanics systems that have been solved. Right? So, finally, I already said this, but if you go play lots of games, you expand your fantasy lexicon. So, you get introduced to lots of new fantasies. Like this one fantasy. I'm sure there's other games that fit into this fantasy. But if you start thinking in terms of fantasy, you can go back to a lot of your favorite games and be like, man, I've always wanted to make a game like Slay the Spire, but realize that you don't like Slay the Spire because it's a card game. You like Slay the Spire because it's about climbing up a giant spire. Oh my god. Just like in Hunter X Hunter. Holy crap. This is a really cool concept. Climbing up a spire is cool. Why didn't I think about the fantasy of climbing up a spire? I can make a whole game about climbing up a spire. Oh my god. Careful with this one. Somebody already made Tower of Guns, which is where you literally climb up a spower. Sorry, a spower. A a tower made of guns and you just collect guns. So, just I didn't want to get somebody super excited there and be like, "Oh my oh my god, holy, I I've thought of it. I'll just make a game like Borderlands, but you're in a tower and ah, it's already been done. Sorry." But yeah, you expand your your fantasy lexicon. You give more mechanical vocabulary like we've been talking about mechanics here like you know single currency economies, right? Like if you can't talk about games in this way, if you can't break down a game into all of its different parts like this, it's going to be harder for you to make games. I'm not gatekeeping here. I'm not saying you can't make games, and I'm not suggesting that you don't have the ability to do that, but the more vocabulary that you have from playing games and the more that you can talk about games and think about games, this is why I make these videos. People are like, "Oh, thank you for making these videos for me." These videos are for me, guys. I'm making these because it forces me to sit down and put my thoughts on paper and not on paper I guess on paper on on digital paper and to talk about these things so that I can have these ideas solidified into my head so it makes me a better developer. All right, that's the number one reason to have a dev YouTube channel is accountability for your ideas, right? But having this vocabulary super important because then you can kind of look at all the games that you've played and look at the games that you're trying to make and you have this really awesome cool vocabulary that you can use to mix and match together or you can use to analyze games or if you're talking with your other developer teammates, you can use that vocabulary to specifically extract or or inject new mechanics or pull out mechanics that you don't like. Right. Also, the more games you play, you kind of see the friction points that have been solved. So, if you played games for long enough or like you go back and you play old games and then you play new games, like playing old platformers and then playing new platformers, platformers haven't changed a ton, but you can kind of see the friction points that get solved. Most notably in platformers, it has been the life system. You, you know, if you die in the original Super Mario Bros., especially if you die like three times without getting a oneup, you go all the way back to the beginning. But in newer platformers, the life system is basically gone. And there's really, really generous checkpoints because people have realized that it's not really fun to punish you that much. Not in every platformer, but that's kind of a thing that's been solved that you can steal and put in your platformer, but you wouldn't know that unless you were playing a ton of platformers. Increases recombination potential. I think this is also a really good way to just come up with with with fantasies is to just play a ton of games and combine them in new ways, right? So yeah, this is the end. This is for you. If you like it, you know, define your fantasy, find similar games, identify what works, extract frameworks, rebuild it in your own context. This is the important part. Don't clone stuff. Rebuild stuff in your own context. Right? And usually if you go out and you find a fantasy that worked like Vampire Survivors, people did a whole bunch of survivors clones, but then when somebody went and and then they rebuilt vamp or sorry, yeah, vampire survivors in their own context, it did really well. Okay. Also, this guy's really good at YouTube, but like still, this is just a good fantasy of the the fantasy of autokilling lots of enemies in a different context. If you look at all the other Vampire Survivors clones, they were the same game. They were like top down 2D. And this is very similar. I think the guy even says in his own devlogs that he he stole from Vampire Survivors.
