Article title: Payne Robinson: On finding good Game Ideas, and making a Success Game | Scope Creepers a Game Dev
Author/Speaker: Emerson (Aarimous) and Payne Robinson
Date: 2026/01
Source Url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5au6PFYEXk

Hey, welcome back to the scope creepers podcast. My name is Emerson today. I have Payne Robinson, which I am completely blanking on the name of his YouTube channel. Is it Payne Robinson It is Payne Robinson. That's really cool., he is the developer of execute which he executed in a really nice fashion. This is a lovely game about, well trying to destroy everything one in the world with a guillotine on a cursed Windows 98 desktop. I think the Aesthetics are great., we talk in this about some of these smart little design decisions., he made and, Payne is a he's a teacher and this happened this is the first time this happened but he starts off the podcast. We start off with him asking me some questions and so instead of cutting that out and starting where maybe I would have started the podcast. Let's start off with where Payne started the podcast off., I recorded this a couple days ago and I'm just realizing and remembering now how the craziest thing about this conversation is it felt like I was talking to like a best friend almost. Payne, and I just hit it off from the beginning and he also lives in Minnesota and we're hanging we're going to like go grab dinner and hopefully I'll get him to an IGDA TC meeting here at some point but, just I just was a great conversation., had a fun time and, I don't I hope you enjoy the conversation. Just it was nice. So let's dive into where Payne wanted to start this conversation and without further ado, let's get into it. Well, I was going to ask you about that., just in general cuz I we both also do content creation on YouTube and, I don't know. I just wanted to ask you about like why you did that. Partly answered right now which is you know, you want to talk to people and have the ability to connect with people but you also just do your own dev logging and I've seen you know, your older videos with the big Godot tutorials. Those are pretty big and people were into those. Those were more edited and more structured you know, and like what why do you >> more free form. Okay, back in the day. Back in the day I did scripting. I did editing and it's just like it took so much time. And I was like I want to be a game developer who makes YouTube videos, not a YouTuber who makes games. Yeah. And so it was just like re-prioritizing and like as a full-time developer I'm like how do I make where's my profit? What and like it wasn't YouTube., so why do I do it? I like sharing the journey. I like the aspects of you know, [snorts] I like the creative process of trying to reflect on my life and my process and turn that into some sort of a narrative that I can sit down and talk about., so I like doing it. It's why I am still going to do it and then the value is getting to have opportunities present itself., which is really hard to understand like the return on investment of any of that stuff. Do you mean just opportunities with collaborations with devs or just like opportunities where some people see you and reach out to you or both or like >> Yeah, all of that. I think you know, think about, a publisher. Publisher wants to work with you and they can maybe see your game and play your game but like when you work with somebody you want them to be nice to work with and a YouTube channel can give you a really good taste of like okay, this is how the person's brain thinks a little bit. A little bit more than you can of like an email and you're like okay, this I could work with this person. So I wonder if some of the opportunities and things that have come are just from like people being like oh, he seems like a pretty chill dude. It is wild. I did I have the, I had the lead Sony UI UX director reach out to me last year after I made a video that went I don't know what viral means anymore cuz like I got 100,000 views. It's like that's not viral to me but everyone's like you're going viral and it's like all right, but whatever it got you know, a good amount of eyes and this guy he didn't reach out to me for anything serious. He was just like hey, you got me to try Pico-8. Like I've been really into I was like what? Like you're the lead UI UX designer at Sony and I got you to try Pico-8. Cool. He's like just wanted to let you know, like super cool video. Like if you ever just need anything reach out to me. I was like okay. See? Sweet. >> [laughter] >> Right, but it's that kind of stuff where it's just totally random. Like you don't realize there's all these people that are in positions much higher than indie dev that are just trolling YouTube just to find stuff you know, so >> Yeah. Yeah, YouTube is an opportunity generator. It's like a dice roller and you do have no idea who's out there rolling dice and creating a like you just you're just shooting stuff off into the void and see what sticks with random people cuz the algorithm is going to I get random stuff given to me. So I'm sure yeah, Sony execs watch YouTube. They hang out or not execs but UI people maybe the execs do. I don't know. >> sure. I'm sure some of them do. So maybe. One of them has to, right? YouTube is one of my mainly content sources. YouTube and Twitch is like where I spend my time. >> Yeah, I don't watch TV. It's you know, it's game dev work YouTube, right? Absolutely. I'm with you there. But do you do like biz dev? I wanted to talk to you biz dev wise. Like I know you work with Thornady and he's like he is the biz dev I feel like and you know, like how which way do you lean? Are you more like I like dreamer gamer centric. Like I just want to make a really good game and like biz dev is secondary or you like in the middle or you lean more Thornady's side where you're like all eyes are good eyes. I'm trying to market every single day. Like where's your head at with all that? I it's interesting cuz I could be the biz dev side. The way my brain works I'm I like spreadsheets. I like organizing thoughts. I like you know, coming up with strategies and plans and then like with game development I find myself I just like the creative process of making games., so much more it was interesting to just like let go of that and say he's going to handle all of that stuff and I can just try to make the game really good. And so it's really it was a weird mode for my brain to pop into of like I'm just doing the game dev side of it all and he also helps with a lot of creative stuff and things like that but, yeah. So yeah, much more the dreamy I want to make a cool game. I want to make something fun and then like relinquish the marketing con and content stuff to the people who have built channels around players. Like you and I both have channels around developers., and I like that. I like sharing how someone might be able to follow in my footsteps but at the same time those aren't players. So the marketability side of YouTube isn't really there anymore for what I how I think about it. that's more of a hobby project as far as like oh, the main meat and potatoes is going to be making games. How about you? Where do you fall on biz dev like stuff like that and making games and you know, It's weird cuz I so I've made five video games and this is my first commercial game that I've published on Steam. Cool. All the other ones were just you know, I started in Roblox when I was like 22, 23 cuz me and my friend were like we can make it big on Roblox dude. That's like all these idiot kids. Let's just get in there and make some stupid stuff and I was a teacher so I was like I got the child psychology. Like we can manipulate the children. >> work. Yeah. >> [laughter] >> Those are my they're my colleagues basically. Yeah. Exactly. So that's kind of how I got into incremental games cuz Tycoons are really big on like I'd played Cookie Clicker and stuff but like Tycoons were huge on, on Roblox. And this is I do kind of want to talk to you about this too is like what even is an incremental game because you look at stuff on Roblox and it's like none of it is management based. It's all like you're running around in a world collecting upgrades like shooting things. It's like it does not like the incremental game we ended up making was this game about spaceships where you fly around on like a track that's like Rainbow Road and there's like voids and stuff that you fall off on the side and you're just collecting scrap and we called it space scrappers and after your after you either fall off the edge or you run out of gas you would go back to your like mothership and you'd buy or upgrade new ships so you could get further on the course and it went on for like forever. We had no idea how to call things. It was all rendered all at once. It ran at like 20 frames. It was awful but it was fun. We had you know, like 10,000 people played and we were like we're so cool. That is that's a lot of people. Right. Well for Roblox it was nothing but it was for a first project it was like holy crap. We're making it. We're doing it. >> that's insane. That's so many people. It was cool. So, my initial question biz dev side. So like I've always been let's just make a cool game and my buddy he doesn't play as many games as me and so he's always been more biz dev where he's like this is the popular genre. We have to make this cuz it's popular and I'm like all right. Yes, but like let's make something cool and then if it fits into the genre then let's take it that way., but now that I've published a game that's made real money. Every game that I've made has gotten a minimum of 10,000 people to play it on itch whatever. Even my old test projects like So, I don't know everybody's talking like, "I don't know why people don't play my game." Like, I feel like I'm in a >> [laughter] >> place of privilege. I'm like I don't know. >> I don't know. Yeah, I'm like I just make something fun. I don't know what people's problem is. Like, just make something that doesn't suck. [laughter] Like >> know what you're talking about. It's so easy. I'm not trying to be rude or anything. Like, I feel like some people hit me up in their comments in YouTube and they're like, "Why are people playing my game?" And I click on it and I watch the trailer and I'm like, "Well, obviously it's not a good game. I don't know." It's >> [laughter] >> How honest do you want me to be? I'm from the Midwest. I can be nice, but like honest opinion, the game is not good. You know, that's and that's okay. We have to make shitty games so we can make good games or most of us do. You can just make a >> [laughter] >> a Rainbow Road game and it's good. >> Right. Yeah, but even then I was like, "Why are people playing this?" But it has to do with so many small decisions I feel like you don't understand unless you play a lot of video games where it's like we can't design the economy like this because that was done, you know, 5 years ago in this failed 10-cent game that everybody hated. So, if we design the economy like this, people won't play it. We're going to design the economy like this other SNES game that I played when I was seven and people loved it and everyone forgot about it. So, they're going to think it's really original and like I don't know. Just having a big repertoire of games to pull from, I feel like I Obviously, I'm going to fail. I'm going to eat my own words, I'm sure, saying like I it's too hard, but I feel like it's hard to make something that sucks if you played enough games. I wonder as a teacher cuz you could get a ego by yourself. It's something I'm like and this year I'm like, "Don't fall victim to hubris, Eremis. Don't get an ego. Like, stay humble. Like, stay grinding." Do you think This is a leading question, I suppose. I'm just going to ask the leading question cuz whatever. >> Fine. Yeah, I'm totally chilling. Do you think that students keep you humble? Oh, yeah. The Some kind of That's Yes and no. Yes, because I'm bald, like very bald. And so, I usually don't wear a hat when I'm at school and the kids are just like, "What's up, Baldy? You suck." Like, every day, you know, just we have a good rapport. It's not in bad taste, but they do it cuz I work at a high school. Do they know you make games? They do. Yeah, so that's like some of them do cuz I teach >> Execute? Yeah. Yeah, so some of them have. I know. It's >> [laughter] >> And it's a very weird line cuz Execute is very obviously about genocide if you think about it. And so, it's like that's not how I marketed it because that would be bad, but I know I'm wondering if anybody will ever find it and then it will be like, "English teacher gets fired because he made a game about genocide." >> [laughter] >> But I've been flying under the radar so far. It gets tough when students try to join my like Discord and I know they're in there and I have to kick them because they're like, "Mr. Robinson." And I'm like, "All right. Like line too far. I'm sorry. Like, maybe when you graduate or something, but like we can't have these un That's a really good line to draw in the sand. Like, hey, you can play the game whatever you want to do, but go kill millions of people, but don't talk to me outside of school. And I can't advertise. that's against my contract, but people ask. They'll be like, "Hey, I found your YouTube channel. I saw you made a game. Can I play your game?" And I'm like, "If you can find the link on the internet, you can go play it, but I can't. I can't facilitate this >> as a teacher with students. I can't be like, "Here's the link. It's on Schoology. Go play my game." You know, like that's I have access to hundreds of people. That would be, you know, against That would be a conflict, but >> So, I play a lot of D&D and I like to think about stuff in terms of D&D. And I it seems like you have a high proficiency bonus to maybe the right idea. And then no pun intended, you're also decent at executing that idea. >> [laughter] >> Yes. Thank you. Where does that it sounds like maybe the theory is that you're you just have played a lot of games in your life. Like, that aptitude for picking ideas that are decent. Where do you attribute kind of that high proficiency in picking ideas that have at least resonated with 10,000 people every time you've kind of published a game somewhere, maybe not on Steam, but on the various platforms you put games on. What do you attribute that to? Do you know anything about Quentin Tarantino? A little bit. I'm going to I know we're going full hubris ego right now and that >> [laughter] >> I'm going to compare myself to Quentin Tarantino like a total Arguably like the goat for some people of like the one of the best directors of all time. It's great. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Let's do it. We're down that rabbit hole. All right. >> I we did >> [laughter] >> So, When Geoff Keighley's talking to you at the award show next year, what are you going to tell him? >> [laughter] >> The next game I launch is going to get like four reviews and I'm just going to totally eat It's going to be like, "Well, you thought you knew what you were talking about." >> [laughter] >> Yeah. Well, well, I saw a documentary about Quentin Tarantino recently and he worked at a video rental store in his like teens to early 20s and he literally watched every single video that came into the store. All of them. And then whenever a new batch would come in, he'd go home, he'd take them, he'd watch them. And he wouldn't just watch them, he would watch them over and he'd study them. And he talked to people about why certain scenes were good and bad and like just dig into them. And I've always liked doing that. Ever since I was a kid, I would always get the new gaming magazines. And I know there's a huge People hate reviews, but I always just loved reading reviews even for games I didn't play. And so, I would read reviews from all these different journalists and compare the different perspectives and really pick apart what parts did they like? What parts did they not like? I thought this game was really cool. I loved this, but this reviewer didn't like it. Why didn't he like it? Oh, so many reviewers are comparing games against each other. Reviewers will be like, "This is a really cool idea, but it's already been done in this game, this game, and it was actually done better." So, I would just start checking out all the different games that they would reference and I'd be like, "Oh my god, this was done better." And it's like this I know that Well, back to Quentin Tarantino. He said because he consumed so many videos like that, when he goes to make movies, he is able to and the reason why he has such good cinematography and good scripting and good characters and just interesting situations that are off the wall, but somehow work, is because he's able to just bring all of these good ideas together from all these different places. And I think that's part of being a good dev is just being able to have an intuition. Like, I can't really explain why something feels good. I guess if I go back in my head and I'm like, "Well, I picked that mechanic because it was kind of like even Execute. So, it was kind of based on Plague Inc., Destroy All Humans, Defend Your Castle, Stick RPG, like maybe Interactive Buddy a little bit. Like, I pulled parts from all those games and kind of made something that was like a mix of all of them, you know? In the moment, how much is it like thinking back to a game I'm thinking back home, it's like I can tell the story of some of the decisions and it's like it's still fi- like some of the moments are fuzzy and I'm like, "Oh, well, you can clearly see inspiration from this or I took this from my first games or these from these games." Like in the moment, do you remember being like conscious of like, "Oh, I'm making this thing like that." Is it more conscious or is that kind of in retrospect you're tying stuff together or some other thing? It's both, for sure. And I'm sure it kind of is like that for you where sometimes I'm consciously like okay, I'm going to pull this mechanic on purpose from this game and try to make it >> the game, you play with it, you're like, "That's a smart way to do that UI thing. Cool, I'm going to do that." >> I just steal it directly. Yep. That's I think a lot of devs do that. They should be doing it. >> Of course. I hope we're doing it. I'm telling people, "Please go play video games." That's what I mean when I play video games. Steal good stuff that isn't like UI things, like you said. The UI is great. >> a game with inventory? Go steal how Minecraft does it. Right. There's no reason not to. The most people in the world have played Minecraft. Just use how they did it. >> Yes, exactly. Don't pick your own button. And why is it H to open inventory? >> [laughter] >> Pick I Pick the Minecraft button. I don't mean to I was playing a developer's game the other day and they had the settings button like on the main menu and then in game there was like no way to access the settings unless you like clicked a few buttons and went back out to the main menu and then click settings. And I was like, "Dude, escape. On the PC, you got to press escape and stop the game. I don't know." And they were like, "Well." And I was like, "Dude, like that's just >> It's just it is. Like it simply is. It's not a There's no even choice there. That's how that button works. And that's part of what I mean here and I think good developers have that intuition for like escape is pause game. That's what it is. That's what you got to know. And there's those I don't know what to call those cuz that's not really a fun thing to know about. As for the like how do you make the game fun and where do you get those decisions? I don't think I would consciously be like, "All right, I'm going to make Execute feel fun in the way that Defend Your Castle felt fun." That was more like I would start playing the game and I'd be like, "This starts This reminds me of Defend Your Castle. Like, I'm going to go back and look at that and see what's similar to Defend Your Castle in my game and what parts I can pull into it." Cuz Defend Your Castle is physics-based. You're throwing people on the ground with your mouse. Like, my game is not like that at all. But the visceral feeling of like having power over little blue guys is, you know, that's fun, right? So, that's all it point. >> You like you know you paid and this is fun. You checked in why do I think this is fun and you're like that you distilled it down like this is the fun part of that. Yeah, getting able to like crush this little blue guy is fun and I was like how can I do that with my skill level cuz I suck at physics programming. So, >> [laughter] >> Yeah, you're like it's that you checked yourself you're like what am I actually capable of doing here? What is actually in my wheelhouse? What is the thing I could do that I can I'm going to say it again what I can execute well. I didn't know that was going to be the pun today but it's it but it is like ideas are free and ideas are hard to come like good ideas are hard to come up with but then it's like taking an idea and executing on it is a different question. So, you're also filtering through to say what am I actually capable of doing at this point? And then what am I capable of doing that people would think is fun? Because then that's the other thing where I'm like all right I'm capable of basically making static sprite animations or like having somebody make a static sprite animation and putting it >> and then putting it in a game. That's where my skill level is. Like that is where I'm most proficient. This is my first commercial Godot game. If you think about execute it is buttons and animations. That is it. It is very so simple. But I was like I played so many games where I'm like all right that can be fun. I played a ton of incremental games. I realized most of them this new wave has a lot of active stuff but like the older ones it's like it's just buttons nothing is really animated. Right? Until Norp. Norp kind of like pushed this domino over where it's like holy crap what if you could see everything you're creating and I was like I'm not cool enough or good enough to do that yet. It's hard. You are. I was going to ask you about that later is like what how the heck do you put so many objects on the screen? But you know then now it's like what's the easiest way to do that static animations and then I had a shader that like made it look like you were buying new you know, enemies and stuff and it's like it looks like you're getting another guillotine but that's just a stupid shader that chat GPT helped me write you know, so >> [laughter] >> that's right. I like that a lot. That's So you said you're making something that other people will like. Is there any filtering it through what you would like? Like do you like execute? I do like execute and I think that's part of it. I have to like it but then I do have to check and see if other people would like it but I feel like How do you do that? It's testing. I mean and I was about to don't steal this or I guess you can doesn't really matter. Like we need more people to know but And then it just cuts to like a black screen while you talk about it and come back. >> [laughter] >> Yeah, well it itch dude. That's all it is I feel like especially for these days like itch is it's a practice Steam run. It's and it's you can be so sloppy. You can take your game that you can create a whole new page for the same game and test it out a second time like That's awesome. >> good. That's I didn't realize until launching this game that your demo and your itch launch you should treat like a real launch and not in the way where it's like you should make everything perfect but you should like act like it's a new game that you're like it's I'm launching this it's a big deal. You should do a little bit of outreach maybe not as big of a blast as you would do with a full game but like tell people about it. Make some posts on Reddit you know, like make it into a little event to get people going. I had 40,000 people play the very first crappy execute demo. Yeah. >> Off of one Reddit post. And I was like okay. How many did you have play Black Hole? It cuz I know you also threw it up on itch, right? >> A ton. Yeah? A ton. I don't know exactly what the itch numbers are. It's a lot. It like it still gets a lot of play on itch. We're actually going to try to update the demo at some point to see what we can like zhuzh up and redirect people back to Steam now to buy the full game but it's something that I used to like same thing as like oh itch is for well in my head itch was for porn games and game jam games. >> [laughter] >> You're not wrong. I'm not wrong but I'm also like there's also a utility for us as developers to say let me practice the skill of promoting the game. Let me test the idea to see if it works and if it doesn't you can ask the question well I still think this is good so why didn't it work? And you can like start garnering the wish list. You can start like you just it's a nice little practice ground for the big show which is the Steam launches. The Steam demo launch the actual launch. Those things are huge. But I was listening to a developer the other day on Jonas Tyroller's podcast. Those ones are so good. I don't know if you listen to those but like every time I listen to those >> because I want to be able to have my own conversations. I don't it's a weird I'm like yes I love Jonas Tyroller and I haven't listened to a single podcast cuz I'm like I want to have all those guests on my podcast. I get it. I totally get that. That makes total sense. Don't >> No, it doesn't cuz those I'm also a developer and this is a hobby. I should be learning from anyways. So, you were listening to the podcast. >> tell you all the cool stuff that happened. I'll give you the spark notes. Yeah, you don't even have to listen to them. The rest of the podcast is just a summary of >> [laughter] >> So, in the in episode 241 of Jonas Tyroller's podcast they talked about marketing as a So, the dev that made Dome Keeper Yeah, yeah. Dome Keeper. >> Bippinbits, yeah. So, ah god. Recently I've been seeing so many devs they're like making the games that I want to make. That's also how I know that I'm on the right track where I was like I was going to make that but I don't have enough people working for me. Ah, stop. Come on. Cloverpit. My like >> example you're like Yeah, Grid Tweaker. I have a in my Discord I have a game called Grid Tweaker where you're in a room your debt is on the wall and you're playing like a machine computer like as an incremental game to like try and like pay off your debt. I made that a year ago. Like but it wasn't done yet and like I didn't have the >> Black Mirror type thing where you're like 50 years in the future you're in this box you know, clicking a button to like mine debt go down. I've it is yeah, exactly. Like >> Well, that's also maybe real life right now. So, Well, as a content creator I'm in this room my debt and all of the stuff that I owe is on the wall and I have to make stuff on the computer to pay it off you know, like that's >> Okay, 50 years in [laughter] the future was just actually today. Shoot. but Bippinbits. Yeah. The guy was singing the praises of itch and they said they do a ton of game jams and then they post to itch and he said if the game hits above a certain threshold they know it will be successful on Steam. So, I didn't realize how much more successful you could be. I've been hitting like 10 to 40,000 which I think is actually probably a low success rate but I think you can make games obviously like Black Hole or whatever other game. He made a demo for Dome Keeper and I think they did like you know, 500,000 on itch or something crazy like that. What? >> And it was like just next level like they're looking for huge numbers where they just flood people in and it almost goes viral on itch and then they make it into a full Steam game. So, I thought that was really cool. You talk about testing wise like you should make a crappy version of your game and post it to itch and if it fails like you said make a new page tweak some stuff but if you can't get anybody to play it for free in the lowest possible friction environment no one's going to buy it. Yes. Oh, interesting. That is step one every day all the time no matter what. I abandoned Grid Tweaker because I couldn't get people to play it. or I couldn't get enough people to play it and I don't think I could execute it at the skill level I would need to. Sure. This is I think this is the context of that then trying to make games that are financially successful. Well, then we're back to biz dev. Yeah. Right. Cuz that's like there's also this side of the coin of like if you can't take a project and see it to the end it doesn't matter. Like if you have to be able to get to the point where it's like released and given to people. And so there's that's that tension in my head of like yeah obviously right now that's where I'm at. I'm like yeah I this is something I'm going to do right? I'm always going to go to itch proving ground and then like decide which actually which things get over to Steam and stuff like that. It's just something in the back of my head I'm like and then I could see some devs getting caught up in that prototyping hell of like always just trying to find something never hitting everything anything and then they're not developing that other side of the skill executing the final product and getting it out there. I think it's so hard. Yes, people do need to finish games but it's even like I would I played Black Hole for I hope my principal doesn't watch this but I was playing it you know, it was Friday the kids were watching a movie you know, I was like all right I Black Hole came up on my computer the freaking achievement pop sound kept tripping some kid off in class like why is the Steam achievement sound going off? They're in class and I was like don't worry about it. So, >> [laughter] >> I was playing a little bit of Black Hole during class. And I was realizing the oh man where did I jump off here? I lost my thread. what were we talking about right before? >> People executing ideas versus like finding marketable games versus like executing and finishing a product and then we jumped into Yes, executing and finishing a product. So, as I was playing Black Hole what stood out to me most was how many like modes that you have in the game, how just clean the settings is like you have all these nice settings like I was looking at your UI a lot. I was looking at the UX. I was looking at your skill tree and just how the entire game just feels extremely professional and I know this isn't your first professional release, but it feels you did a nice job. It is a finely crafted game. It feels like it could have been made by a full studio. So excellent work. Thank you. Tip to you, sir. and I really recognize that, but I'm like I don't think people need to do that. If you look at Execute, it does not feel that way. I don't think it feels as professional as it should feel. I think it has just enough to squeak by and the game play carries the rest and the game play still isn't for everybody, but that's as much as I needed to finish the game, you know, and so I feel like a lot of devs are looking at what you're doing, not you specifically, maybe you specifically, but just developers in general and they're like, well, I have to have all these different languages and I have to have all these accessibility settings and all these different modes and I got to have all these things and like I can't finish my game until I have all this and if it's your first game like doing all that stuff is you can't do all that stuff, man. Like it's too hard. You don't have enough coding skills or organizational abilities to organize all that crap out and make it work, right? So it's hard to talk people out of that and to tell them to make something that is super small. Again, my game is buttons and static animations like that was the first game and it took me five months, you know, like knock it off, guys. Relax. Make something easier. Yeah, I feel like we as developers and people in general it's just like we get in our way so often. And if the game isn't good the rest of it doesn't matter. Yeah. Like we didn't add all that stuff like the mode selector, all the like those were literally the last things I did. Controller support like localization like all that stuff is like at the very end. I'm like, okay, cool. And I have experience so it didn't take me too long. I knew I could put it in later and it's just like the game has to be fun. Like there's so many games I was at a IGDA TC and they were like talking and they were like all that they're coming up with all these different flaws of different games and I'm like and those games still sold hundreds of thousands of copies. Games can be great despite some big major flaws. A lot of games have like durability for items. I'm like, I don't want Right. >> Like Valheim's great despite durability. Like I don't like durability in that game. That's my personal opinion and like and it's still a fun game. Like it's hard to figure out that fun. How do you do that? How do you narrow your scope down? How do you get the small game? How do you take the idea like do you have this You seem like you do have ideas for bigger crazier games. How do you What knock yourself off the ledge and find the fun and just can you give us a quick five-step pro- That's my next video, man. Don't make me >> Sorry. [laughter] No, but I think you're right. Like how do you I think you have to I don't know if you're type A or type B. You seem like you're more of a type A person than a type B person. >> I'm dyslexic and I have no idea which one is which. >> [laughter] >> Is that real? Yeah, I'm literally like which one's [laughter] A and B? Because I can't logically reason it out which one is which. I'm like hmm I don't know. A is [laughter] A is the first letter of the alphabet, right? So A is like the cleaner one, you know, cuz it comes first. >> now my brain can logically reason it. Yeah, there you go. And B >> teacher. Perfect. >> Got you. B is second, you know, so B is like oh, like I woke up late cuz I'm the second one, right? So it's like the person who's less detail oriented, doesn't have as good of a schedule. So I don't know. How organized are you as a developer? Like cuz I think this is a is issue of organization and perfectionism. I've done a lot of different tracking methods throughout my life. I'm a recovering software engineer and I >> [laughter] >> Yeah, you get a lot of bad practices working in corporate IT. but I tried like Trello boards and stories and lists and different methodologies and the thing that works the best for me is having a to-do list Hmm. and then having a maybe someday to-do list, which is basically a trash can. And my to-do list reasonably needs to be three to five major bullet points long. If it gets longer, it's overwhelming and I can't do it. So it's like I need to look a little bit in the future and then when I get all that done, I can always find more stuff to work on. So That's awesome. Does that help you understand if I'm A or B? I'm probably more A than B maybe? [laughter] Kind of. I work the same way. I actually I have My big thing is posted notes that are horribly written and so no one can read them and >> Perfect. that's how you No one's going to steal your ideas then. And a to-do list >> Is this English? Is this He speaks his own language. This looks like Portuguese and Spanish, but it's English words. What is going on? >> [laughter] >> You can see the relics here of English. >> Yeah, it's a little hieroglyphs, you know, I make some of the letters look like people. Yeah. One of them is getting his head chopped off. Yeah, always. Yeah, on every note. The E is just a >> [laughter] >> It's a guillotine, yeah. Every time. That's how I do my periods. >> [laughter] >> it takes forever to write any notes down cuz I drawing a period. Every I use a lot of periods apparently. so I it's more I feel like when you're developing so Execute is and part of everybody's asking for updates and like, oh, when are you going to do the next mode and like you should have like people are deranged like with this game. Like I marketed to the psychos. It's crazy. >> 96% positivity rating, too. That's really good for 250 reviews. You're on your way to overwhelmingly positive. >> I'm hoping to get there. That would be super cool. I Thank you. I Every game I launch, I want to hit overwhelmingly positive. That's my goal. Obviously, I'm not going to hit that, but that's everybody's goal, but I want to be but when you're coding are how type A or type B are you? Cuz you've got your goals, but like are you building modular systems that you can slot stuff into or is it just like just get it done, spaghetti all the way, we'll figure it out later, like where do you sit? Spaghetti all the way. All the way on the spaghetti side? Like you're like over here like It is >> your rigatoni and your bolognese like It's a I there's again recovering software engineer. So there's an urge to sometimes do more programming and go a little bit more aggressive with stuff and then it's like nah, it can be good enough for now and that might be good enough forever. Now with a game like Execute all the bill came due and there was time where I had to spend a lot of effort optimizing and getting it so we could show stuff like the cap on a lot of stuff in that game is simply a technical limitation, not a design philosophy around what we're doing. Like a lot of the decisions we made were just around like how can we make this game not break? Like which is good. Constraints are helpful, right? That creates creativity of like what can we do with what we have in the time and my technical limitations as a dummy programmer like I'm not I've never been like a giga chad programmer. Like I'm going to implement all these crazy algorithms like mm-mm. And like I know that about myself. So I'm much more type B programming like functional. Let's get it work. Let's see if it's fun and then knowing my limitations, what can I actually make, which is similar to Execute. So I think and I do want to go back to what you said about optimizing cuz I think that's going to be an interesting conversation. But I think this is the answer now here. We've kind of talked around it for a while. The original question you asked is how do we get people to narrow their scope down and like how do you not over scope and make too much? The answer is you have to be a type B programmer. You have to be a type B person that's okay making something that is imperfect and knowing in the back of your head somewhere that it is making your game run worse because it is not programmed properly, but it works and knowing in the back of your head somewhere that parts of that program you have no idea what they're really doing because you got it to work at one time really, you know, 2:00 in the morning with three cups of coffee. Somehow this function ends up doing what you wanted it to do and you forgot about it. Right. You're like, whatever. >> works, right? You don't get points for doing it 100% better. Right. >> If it just works, that's you're across the finish line. Like >> I agree most of the time. With Execute, you would think that you'd be able to easily slot in new static animations for each machine so that I could upgrade. Like, oh, if you want a new grease machine, yeah, hit the button. It just puts new sprites in and it changed some of the data on the buttons. That is not how it works at all. it is horribly [laughter] programmed. I have to go in None of it's hard coded, but like the way that I did the resources and the save system and how you can like prestige and everything like there's too many layers to just be able to easily swap something in and out without me going back and rewriting it so that it is a little bit more modular. I know how to do that, but like the amount of time it would take me to do that is not worth it. >> Yeah. but being able to just go in and throw some stuff at the table, I think that's what people need to do to make things more to You just got to be able to throw stuff down and know your limitations. Like go in and constrain yourself. Limitations breed creativity. That would be the second thing I would say to do is like step one, be type B, throw spaghetti at the wall. Step two, limit yourself. When I went into Execute, I was like buttons. I'm going to do I said one currency, but it ended up being like 10. >> [laughter] >> And then static animations, and that's what I stuck to for the whole game, you know, and that helped me make something, and I was like, "What can be fun within this space, right?" So >> Yeah. And maybe if you had gone down the modularity path, you wouldn't have made the game yet. Right. >> Like you wouldn't have been done yet. Maybe that would have brought you down this path, and then you'd have been prioritizing the wrong things that you wouldn't have been able to get to itch in time, like yada. All of a sudden, now the project doesn't even see the light of day. I think it probably still would have sold the same, and it might not have been as fun. It probably would have been fun, but there would have been cuz my original idea, like a few months ago, I was going to go down that path and rewrite everything, and it was going to be like every time you restarted your pit, you were going to be able to pick a new machine that you could slot in. And then I was going to have to rebalance that machine with all the other machines cuz they all feed into each other in this really linear way, right? And I was like, "This linear way is too linear. People are going to hate this." It turns out people only wanted to kill everyone in 3 hours with this really linear way, and that's fine. And people didn't need to have all of these different options, right? So >> Yeah. Optimization-wise, I was playing Black Hole, and I was trying to figure out how the heck you were having so many sprites on the screen at the same time cuz in Execute, when you start building nukes, it's the only time in the game where actually spawn real sprites and not texture wrecks. Yeah. Sprites [laughter] come in, and they grab the iron from the inventory, and they walk over to the nuke, and they drop it in. And every time you spawn those guys, the whole game lags. >> [laughter] >> Because I instantiate them all at once, and I have an object pool for them, but even object pooling didn't really help that much, and it was one of those things where I was like, "I don't feel like figuring this out." But I watched you do some stuff. I was trying to figure out how you were doing it, and yeah, I was playing it on my Mac with 10 other Chrome tabs open, and streaming a video to a bunch of students, and it was still running. >> That's pretty good. So, you did good. How did you do that, man? In Godot, getting technical here, how do you get stuff to be on the screen cuz I want to make a lot of stuff on the screen game. One I realized that's the fun part of the game. Like the fun part of Norp is seeing the stuff fly. I'm like, "So the stuff fall falling in, I'm like, we have to protect that. We can't just limit it. It can't be one per thing. There needs to be this scaling factor." And that's the That's I'm like, "This is breaking stuff feels good, whatever, but like seeing the ma effect of stuff, eventually you just have it like it does scale up to these crazy amounts at the end." But you hit the milestone, and everything turned into these little pixels and got sucked in. I was like, "Oh!" Mhm. And it didn't lag at all. I was like, "Damn it! >> [laughter] >> YOU GENIUS! YOU FIGURED IT OUT!" NO, I'M DUMB, and I But I realized I'm like, when you get to optimization, the question's going to come up of like, "What do we sacrifice? What do we start cutting? What do we What things aren't like serving the game?" It helps kind of filter through some of those ideas like, "What do we actually need to worry about here? What do we need to like think about?" And there's three different buckets of optimizations. I'm going to start with just the simple objects on the screen. They used to be physics objects on the screen. And so they would pop in, and then the Godot physics engine would like take over, and it would start pushing stuff apart, and physics in Godot and physics in general, I think I just it's super expensive. And so I started with physics cuz I was like, "Oh, then as things rotate around the outside, they'll go slow, and the inside will go fast, and stuff will bunch up." And I'm like, "Ooh, I like how they bunch up, and then they knock into each other." I'm like, "That was really cool." And then I was like trying to optimize cuz we started hitting hard caps of objects on screen. And I had a buddy, Nick Glenn, come in, and he's kind of just helping me work through this. Nick Glenn is a great programmer. He's been doing a lot of stuff, and he hopped in, and he's just kind of like asking questions and poking things. He's like, "This physics stuff is a lot. What if you just did something else? Like remove physics from the game, and do something simple like a boids algorithm, which is just like given objects, you can space it out." And so I implemented a simple one cuz I'm smart enough to follow how to do boids algorithms and stuff. but And by that, I mean look up a guide, and then follow the guide. Of course. And so I'm like, I'm like, "Mhm, here's the three rules of I can't listen to you right now." And there was something about spacing and >> Tell us what a boid algorithm is because So, you got rid of physics, and I'm guessing a boid algorithm is just like a simpler way to do {quote} {unquote} physics. Like it's like Think about how like birds fly around, I think is a common way things are explained. It's like birds want to be in a flock, but they also want to be apart from each other. And so a boids algorithm is kind of that like how does an object space itself from other entities? >> Simple behavioral rules that each object follows. It doesn't take a lot of computation power. Yeah, and you can do the naive way is like you have one, and then it just looks at all of the other objects you want it to be apart from, and then it just started to like move itself in some sort of math, you know, dot I don't insert math here away from other things in the right direction, and you can weight that and all those different things. that does get slow when you get a lot of objects, and that's where Claude came in. I was like, "Hey Claude, I got this boids algorithm thing, and it's kind of slow. Can you help me out here?" And he's like, "Absolutely. I'm really good at this thing." And it is. >> I love math. I'm an AI. >> Awesome. And then we So, it's just like it's just literally working like giving it I think AI is really hard to like vibe code with. At least I do. I find it really hard to vibe code, but if I can give it something and say, "Hey, take this thing and like it's slow. Can you make it faster?" And then it makes it faster. So, that was a one really big change was turning it into like not physics-based, and nobody noticed. I thought people would be like, "Oh, it's not the same anymore." Nobody. Literally no one. Like, "Okay, cool. Nice." And then it's like even then that movement's all batched. And so I think the biggest thing is like it's all an illusion. It just has to feel right. Doesn't have to be physically right. It has to look and feel right. And those are two very different things in my head. And I got stuck in the like, "Oh, it has to be They're asteroids and space objects. We're going to be Not like it's a physics sim game, but I'm like I wanted them to clank into each other and do physics-y things." And >> Right. Feel like you're in the sim. >> That's not what made the game fun. Right. Yeah. Kill your darlings, right? That was >> And any questions with that idea? I God, there's so much. Develop It's so much fun to talk about this stuff. It is a game dev podcast, so we absolutely can. That's Oh my god. I Okay, but vibe coding, I agree with you. I just wanted to say right now like I don't really vibe code anything either. It's more like I make my dumb idea, and then if I want it to be checked, I'm like, "Is this the best way to do it?" Usually, I feel like I can do it better than the GPT can do it unless it's math. It's even like It's I think it can maybe do it fine, but it's like I need to understand it. Right. And oftentimes, I'll ask it to do something, and then I'll spend 3 hours being like, "This isn't quite right, but how do I What is it doing?" >> Yeah. Well, it does stuff in weird ways that I feel like are over-engineered. >> with strings. Yes, it does like that. >> and strings. I That is not good. >> I'm doing dictionaries with enumerators, and it like was trying to lead me away from that, and I was like, "What do you mean, no? What are you talking about? Like, [laughter] god damn it." I'm just dyslexic. I can't spell. If you give me a hard-coded string, I'm going to spell it wrong. Yes. But so the batch coding is super interesting. How did you batch code like you're updating like every couple of frames, it's like, "All right, now where is everything?" And then it updates it and moves it. Like, what do you mean it was batch The movement was batch coded. Like, how It's like the I think the movement was every frame. So, things were like Things rotated around every frame, and that was really cheap calculations. But then the boids stuff is where it becomes a little bit harder. So, then the boids updates were batched. So, like I think every frame, a third of them had their like velocity impacted by boids. And then I could like So, like if something is overlapping, a third of them will like try to move themselves apart, and it I basically played with the batch size and the frequency until it felt fine. Okay. but like that's all that It's like it just has to feel fine. It doesn't have to like necessarily look good or bad, which is nice. The other two things I'll mention for optimization is the stuff going into the center. That is what's called a multi-mesh instance. you can look it up online. I watched a bunch of tutorials before I dove into it, and they basically like tells Godot, render all of these things at once. Like if you have 2,000 sprites on the screen, it's two It's like 2,000 draw calls to Godot. Right. And that can like slow it down. Where a if you have the same texture in 2,000 spots, it can all of a sudden become one draw call, and it just works kind of. I don't know. That's another thing where I like I got it to work fine, and then I also had Claude come in and optimize that to all hell to make that really good because as we got that number higher and higher, that it gets to like thousands and thousands of those things on the screen at once. And that became really important to get that right. And actually, we do some fun things with that, too, of like as you get further in the game, we start to bring down the we artificially make the number from the asteroids get small. Because the more important ones are the bigger ones now, which are going to be the planet ones, the star ones. And so then you slowly just like all at one point it was like 15-20 pop out of an asteroid and then we it comes down to one and you just don't even like it's just background noise. And so that was actually Thorny's idea to kind of call the little ones and then to bring the other ones and make them physically bigger and larger on the screen so that it pulls your attention. So you don't even like one player mentioned that they saw this happening. They're like, "Is there any way for me to turn that off?" Like I want more to come on my screen. >> [laughter] >> I suppose I could That's an optimization. If you've got a 5090 and a killer CPU, maybe. It's like a warning screen like don't press this button. >> [laughter] >> >> cool though. I it's I love all those weird little optimization tricks where it's like you wouldn't notice. Yeah. Final one is object pooling and then Yeah. I've done that. Like so that's like all the effects and stuff are all pulled up and like just I don't instantiate really anything. All the stuff gets like slowly instantiated as the game first loads in. and then like That multi-mesh >> That's really expensive in Godot. It's really cool. Does it have to be it has to be the same sprite or is it you're talking about the particles that come out of the asteroids where the multi-mesh instance? Yeah, it you pick the spr- you pick like the texture you put into the multi-mesh instance. Mhm. And then it has a bunch of IDs and you can do stuff on those IDs. You can like change the transform, you can change the color, you can I think you can skew them, you can even do shader stuff on them as well. I didn't do any shader stuff, but I did change the colors of them. and then you can just say like every frame or whenever it got batched or something, I would say like move this thing closer to the center along this formula that it would follow and just kind of flow in there nicely. So Very weird, very interesting and very helpful for our keeping the frame rate up. Did you art-wise I noticed like did you plan this for efficiency? Cuz I know your art style is very minimalistic. And I think honestly I think that was a big draw of the game for a lot of people is that it just looks pretty and you go and you click on it and stuff's moving into this circle and you're like, "Wow, pretty stuff in the circle. Wow." and it just looks nice. But I noticed it probably didn't take you that much time to draw the asteroids, you know? I know the planets and the bigger stuff maybe it took a little bit more time, but like was it all just different random shapes that you were throwing together in Affinity or like how did you do all that? The asteroids are procedural generation with the help of AI to create that. Like to just like make the little circles and stuff. >> they're procedurally generated with like the polygon tool or something. >> 2D node and then there's a line 2D node and then that's all duplicated for the health like when you hit them down, they're their own health bar. Yeah. So it's just another layer of another polygon 2D and another line 2D that have a different they have a different color and then the there's a progress bar that I like do math to figure out how big that should be, so UI element and you can like clip that. And so then as the progress bar fills down, it starts to reveal the true like color of it from behind everything. Wow. That could be an interesting video to walk through >> Yeah. some of those hacky things cuz they are hacky. They're like game dev's an illusion. It just has to look good and it can be like the asteroids are stupid. They're really it's like there's probably a better way to do it, but it works. Like No, I think that's the best way to do it. I don't think I was imagining >> stupid in an endearing term in my head though. I'm not like bringing myself down. I'm like I'm proud of how stupid it is. It's stupid in the way that you use the things in the way they probably weren't meant to be used, right? But like it's smart in the fact that it totally works and it looks cool, right? So >> Yeah. I always looked at that polygon tool and was like, "Who the uses this, man? Like what is this for?" [laughter] Who's drawing stuff in the game? Like no one's going to make a game that makes over a hundred grand doing this. No, how could they? >> [laughter] >> What hacky things did you do in Execute? There's got to be some stuff. I mean you mentioned a few things of like modularity wasn't quite there for you, but like are there any like weird little hacks that come to mind? Yeah, I mean as far as I guess hard caps go for a while everything was infinite, so you could infinitely get as many things as you wanted like amount-wise cuz there's amount, there's speed and then there's Effectively in- infinite or like reasonably infinite? Cuz like >> infinite, yeah. Would the like cost scaling get to be too high? Yeah, but it was at one point it was scaled so that you could just go forever, you know? And I was the plan was to add like, "All right, you're on a new planet now and there's 16 billion people. You can go forever." But what I realized is the way that I did So I don't use any Here's a hacky thing. I don't use animation players at all in Execute. There's no animation player nodes at all. I wrote my own animation player. I do this in every Godot game that I make. That blows me away. >> It's not a big deal. I promise. It's a dumb thing. Like it sounds like, "Well, you wrote your own animation player?" Like it is I use a timer and an array and I say, "Hey, when the timer's done, move to the next thing in the array." That's it. That's I'm going to [laughter] cut this part out. I'm going to let you just be I wrote my own node. That's it. That's all that it is. And there's I think it's actually two timers because you can do stuff in between the frames. But I liked it because it would give me more control over the specific sprites and it allowed me to swap sprites. I don't I also don't work with sprite sheets. I work with individual PNGs. just because in Godot you can drag that in as a whole array and then I could replace individual things and I just like having control over it. Somebody's rolling over there like, "God, this is so >> What the hell is wrong with this It just Well, even this new game I'm making, it's it has to do with people shooting each other. More static animation things and it's like I have to replace the enemies sometimes and it's like all the enemies have the same animation, but in order to replace it inside an animation player I have to access all these weird properties and the animation player doesn't always work or update properly. >> Yeah. >> weird little things and I was like, "That sucks. I'd rather just have an array with PNGs in it and I know exactly what's happening. I can just swap arrays and do But the problem with that is the timer node in Godot gets very inaccurate when you get pretty low. So as people are >> [laughter] >> are upgrading you get down to like, you know, 0.002 and Godot's like, "I don't know. It's like whatever number I feel like." >> Whatever, yeah. >> [laughter] >> And you know, that So I had to hard cap some of the speed upgrades because you get to the point where on my computer it's fine. I can handle it, but if you play on browser on an older computer like it just does it just starts going slower instead of faster. >> We limit the clicker of how fast it can click cuz it gets infinite and it gets silly and it kind of hurts your brain and we're like we don't want to hurt someone's brain. We already hurt it enough with the dopamine overdrive. So Yeah. Interesting. I like the little hacks like that. And that's So that seems like it comes down to even like personal preference and just something you found annoying and how the animation player works. I want to get better with the animation player, but it just feels like it's so buggy. It's probably me, but I just it doesn't feel modular in the way that it I feel like Godot makes modular stuff. Like I feel like if I have a shoot animation where a guy lifts his arm up and shoots I should be able to get a whole other sprite sheet or a whole other bunch of PNGs and somehow like swap in the same animation without having to do a bunch of hacky It's like could it be something to do with could there be some sort of like animation node with like sub-animation tracks or something instead of like do a more scene and node-based approach instead of this like widget in the bottom. Yeah, or >> [sighs] >> or just giving the you the ability to access each keyframe as an array or something like that. Like that would be huge cuz then you could cuz I cuz keyframes are essentially an array or a dictionary I would imagine somewhere and the way that you access them is just not intuitive at all. You can do it. It's just it's like changing shader properties from code. You know, you have to like ask about it with a string and it just feels so it feels like you're hacking the engine. >> Yes. You know? >> Shader I'm like, "How do I set a shader parameter?" And I always like I always have to guess. I'm like I've done this so many times [laughter] that I'm like Let me just see if is it set parameter? And I'm like, "Oh, wait. That was cool. I got that one right that [laughter] time." Or it was like, "Is it set param?" Like I don't know. This is the thing where like some people come to this thing and they're like, "Okay, I'm going to go into the engine source code and change and fix it." And I'm like I'm just going to just change my prob- I'm going to like I can't solve the problem right now, so I'm just going to I'm going to change the problem. Like I don't know how to fix it and I don't really want to go down that path. So I'm just I'm not going to do it that way. I'm going to design a different solution to it. I'm the same way. I Are there things in Execute that you came across that were challenging and you're like, "Let me just change how the game is going to work so that it can fit your skills and the engine?" Yeah, the original premise was to make you're supposed to just kill everybody with a guillotine. Like there was going to be no nukes, there was going to be no other machines. it was just going to be a guillotine and you're capturing people. I eventually figured out that was going to be boring later, but initially on screen it's just a grid container with a bunch of texture rects in it. And I figured out that like I wanted to just make that infinitely big and they would just get really small, so it'd be funny cuz you'd have like hundreds of thousands of guillotines just like yeah, chopping away. But because of the sprite is 64 by 64, so once you get it down to be that small like Godot won't scale it anymore unless you know, take the grid container and like put it inside of a canvas layer or something and then zoom out from it or I had to do a bunch of I was like this sucks. So I guess >> going like this doesn't feel good. Right. >> Like I don't know. Is this actually going to work? >> I could make it work, but it was going to take me a long time. It doesn't feel good. If it did work, it probably would feel hacky. It wouldn't feel that good. So I was like god damn it. All right, I guess I will scale the game so you don't end up getting that many guillotines and that's when I wrote that shader where like you buy a guillotine and instead of it making a new instance, it like doubles it behind it. And then that didn't add enough guillotines cuz it went out and got way too small and you couldn't see it anymore. I was like So I was like I guess we'll do both. And so with both you end up having a new instance and a bunch of guillotines. And then eventually that wasn't enough. So I had to make it so that you had a bunch of people rolled into a little sausage. And I don't know if you got that far, but there's a mega guillotine where like you roll everybody up into a big cigar of like 50 people and there's like this big cheese grater thing that you drop on top of their heads. >> [laughter] >> And I replaced the animation with that you're killing like 100 people in one chop and then that goes on forever and there's like hundreds of instances of those. So >> Yeah. Okay, this is a good spot I think to dive into this question of like our game's very active and I very purposely chose active because I just wanted my I wanted the player hooked into it and I as a like Path of Exile player I'm like I have a certain taste and style with this like active gameplay and I'm not much of a passive gameplay player like that. Can you talk about Execute being more passive and did you Were there ideas to make it more active or was it always a passive thing? Totally. I The idea was to make it so that you could play it as actively as you wanted if you wanted to and you could play it passively if you wanted to. I've what I play it pretty actively cuz I can beat it in about 2 hours. But I've seen people beat it in 7 hours, you know, cuz they make some choices and they leave it running. So I wanted to do both. I liked it more active. I was trying to copy Factorio and just that like feeling. I don't know if you play any factory games or you have you. Yeah, I played Factorio back in like the beginning of the pandemic and it was it's the last game I remember literally being like and now it's 2:00 a.m. Yep. That every time. So I love those games, but I hate how you have to go in and design you know, coding architecture in order to like have fun and it's like that's not always a fun thing to do at the end of the day. So I was like I want this game to be that fuel ball bottleneck where you have new machines, but you need to get fuel to them. And that bottleneck is fun to figure out. You have thing now, new problem. You have to solve problem then because you did this, you can get a new thing and it just yeah, it's nice to look. back and forth, right? Interesting. Factorio as an inspiration there. I like that. I condensed that down and that's kind of my secret sauce is like finding a game I really like that's too complicated and then like how do I condense that loop down into something really small. And so >> Salk ruler of you. I love that guy. So but that's what I did and I feel like if you play it that way, it's as active as Factorio is where you're always running back and forth between machines. Yeah. >> And it can also be as idle as Factorio is where you can just let your machines run for a while if you want to, but like there's no >> really does kick. There's like there's no other like right now you when you're playing the main game of Black Hole, you have to be active. You can't just say well, I'm going to let it run for a little bit and I'll come back like we very purposely designed it with that more active gameplay, but you did a little bit more both, which I think a lot of games do, right? There's opportunities to let it be more chill and then also be more active. Were there any challenges you faced in that? Yeah, but if you do play it passively, it's not satisfying at all because it's balanced toward a more active gameplay style. Yeah. If you're playing it >> of it all is more if you're being active then you're going to hit the good timing, the novelty, the great moments. Yes, if you let it chill for a while, it gets to the point where you can just like buy too many things at once and then you don't kind of get that hit of like all this new upgrade and I get to play with it for 5 minutes and then okay, the next one and I get to play with that for 5 minutes and understand how that machine works. >> just blow past all the novelty and little power spikes and >> Yep. But it was really hard to make a game where you balanced it in reverse. Like incremental games are like who cares how big it gets? Like we're just going to keep going up and up. I know I guess Black Hole I have not beat Black Hole, but when you beat Black Hole it you feed the Black Hole and it ends, right? There's an ending to it. Okay. So you did the same thing where you know, you're going toward a goal of an ending, but going back from a big number to zero was weird because Like you knew your big number cuz we kind of stumbled into where we got to and we're like quadrillion seems like a decent final dollar value, but like so you do you I mean if was it the population of the earth is where you're we're working back from? Yep. So 8 billion down to zero. I knew that from the very beginning and then as it was very weird >> update? Yeah, so there's Do you pull it Do you Are you pulling in the population of the earth? >> I was manually updating it. For a while there was an API call, but it was breaking. Yeah, that seems like a good thing to just say I'm going to manually change it. Right. So it's [laughter] like commented out in the code this API call. >> Yeah. That seems like complexity that's like fun for you and then could just ruin someone's gameplay experience. Right. Well, people were asking. They're like put it in. I want like real people like real I want the real earth. I was like okay, like that's why people are so deranged and like originally people there was no >> me who I just killed? You're like no, I can't. >> There are. People were like can you generate random names for every person that dies and put it on the screen? I was like why? >> [laughter] >> There is a nice GitHub that has a list of first and last names and it's huge. I'm just saying it is free. It is up, but I'm like don't do that cuz that is a bad I think that's a good line to draw, but I'm like if you ever do need names, there's a great GitHub repo just a long list of names. >> Not for Execute, but in the future. >> I worked very hard because this is a game about genocide to make it so that it was not like you're killing a specific group of people, you know, or like Play yeah, play game. Like play game isn't like yeah, Debbie just died. The original It's my artist is in Brazil and the original image was of like a blue guy in the guillotine and then there was a red guy chopping his head off and I was like I live in the US. The market is going to be US. We can't have blue guys killing red guys or vice versa. Like it's got to be all one color guy. I was arguing for gray guys, but he's like blue guys are going to look better. I was like all right. We'll go with the blue guys. Yeah. [snorts] >> So Yeah, that's a really >> [laughter] >> astute thought to be like okay, like yeah, we can't Right. >> You understood what you were making, which is helpful. I Do you think this is a bad idea? I think this is a bad idea, but I think it might make the game go viral if I do it. If What if? I'm leaning in. >> [laughter] >> There is a way and I've been working on this feature in the background just to see if I could do it. There is a way where I could replace the faces of the blue guys with a picture that you upload. So people could upload a picture of whatever or whomever they wanted and then I could put a button in the game that would let you post it somewhere. So people might be posting pictures of X person getting their head chopped off in this fun and quirky game. Yeah. Hmm. I it certainly makes it more clippable. >> [laughter] >> I don't know. I don't I think it's probably a bad idea because people are definitely going to go put people in there that they shouldn't be doing and then it's going to put attention on me that It opens yourself up to much more risk. And there's reward there and you also have a full-time job, so >> [laughter] >> It's That is an interesting thought and I think your guts are right that there's an upswing there, but there's also a big downswing. Oh yeah. There's a reason I haven't done it. I made that feature a couple weeks ago, but my mom was like don't put that in the game. I was like mom, come on. [laughter] She hates that I made this game. She's like I haven't been able to tell any of your any of my friends about this. I want to tell them. You're I send I can't send them your videos or the game and their kids are asking if they play it, but you're killing it. Why did YOU MAKE THIS? >> [laughter] >> I'M LIKE MOM, it's satire. It's like South Park. It's okay. She's like I hate South Park. Yeah. [laughter] Yeah, she's pissed that I made this game. It's really funny. That's good though. I think that's actually like a good like if you it is a little evocative. Like it should >> [snorts] >> it should rub some people the wrong way. >> I went a little too far I think. I think that's why I didn't have as many content creators play it. even the Godot guy, you know, the guy who's like this was made in Godot. Like he that YouTube channel that posts a list of games every week. >> Home Dev. Yeah. >> Yep. He wouldn't put it on there. I sent it to him like three times and he was just like, "Nope." And I was like, "Man, there's been gory games on here. Come on. There is so many people who like I knew they played it cuz I sent them a key and saw it got added, but You can see. Yeah, I was like, "I know you have the key. I know you played the game." So, yeah, I don't know. I don't think I'm going to The next game I'm going to make is going to be pretty gory as well, but it's not going to be about genocide. So, it's going to be about vampires. I think gore and vampires is okay, right? People like vampires. People accept gore and vampires. I don't know why we can have Modern Warfare 2 where you're shooting up an airport and everyone's like okay with that, but like we can't chop blue people's heads off with guillotine. Like where is the line, guys? Like come on. >> [laughter] >> I think you found the line, which is putting PNGs on the face. Well, I think I asked you all the questions that I had. And I know you got to go do yoga. I do have yoga. I'm quite excited. Yeah. What's your Do you do like hot yoga or what's your yoga practice? it's like community yoga. I don't know like people do it. I don't know I think I have there's a teacher this I don't know what a weird answer. >> [laughter] >> Well, there's like vinyasa. There's like >> my practice and I say people do it. Yeah, I know people do it. Yeah, but what's the name of it? Is it restorative? Is it yeah, I do yoga. >> [laughter] >> It's yoga. I don't know. I Yes. Why do you do it? Does it help center you? Like it do you think is it an important aspect to your development? We didn't talk about the outside perspective of that. >> It's become incredibly important to me, my practice, both a yoga practice, but even just like I keeping me grounded and present in my body and like thinking of the release in like December, I did so much yoga and so many workouts like the week before the game came out, I think I did like five or six like I'm just like, I need to ex- I need to export energy. It needs to get out of my system because I'm so nervous with the release coming out here soon. Like we had a lot of wish list going in, so we knew it was going to be successful in some regard, but we didn't know how. And I'm interested to know how you feel about this is like all of a sudden our agency goes to zero. The game's done. And in fact, making changes at this point could ruin it. Like I could I'm again, dumb monkey programmer. I understood that I'm so I'm like, if I start doing stuff Yeah. We had it play tested. We had it was working. And if I go and change something, it could break everything. And so, even like break the balance of the game, right? So, there's certain bugs in the game that were like, "This is part of the game now." Because it's all balanced around the fact that bug exists. >> You don't want to screw something up. Yep. Yeah. So, it was yoga became something that I realized is like, "Oh, this is important for me to maintain my productivity as a human, as a you know, I can show up better as a developer, I can show up better in my with my friends and family." Like it is becoming something that is almost like the other half of therapy for me. Like I go to therapy every 2 weeks and it's like that's been really helpful. And then yoga is also like a continuation of some of that practice for me. And it has a lot of physical benefits as well to me. So, that's why I keep doing it and it's why it's a big part of what's going to be the future for me at least. >> Do you work out as well? Is that >> Yeah. Do you like Do you lift? Do you run? Like what's the >> a Peloton in my over in the room over there that I do and I pedal my little heart out. I'm a I swam for 13 to 14 years, so I've working out's been a huge part of my life and like especially game dev, I'm like I'm better when I've done some sort of workout. So, is that your You wake up early, you do some sort of yoga, a workout and then you get to work. Like what's Do you find that it helps you? >> Usually like a mid- It depends on the day. I am I do work best when I wake up at 6:00, but it's really hard in Minnesota in the winter to wake up at 6:00. but I it's better if waking up at 6:00, going to bed at 9:00, like having that you know, those good routines like With the sound routines like that help a lot I think for me to like make sure I'm doing and being productive and like keeping my apartment clean and all those different things. So, what are you What are the things that help you cuz you have a full-time job and doing hobby game dev is notoriously challenging. Are there little things that little habits, things like that help get you to the desk? What does that process look like for you? God damn, man. I want to go full-time so bad cuz this job is so game dev. It requires so much mental energy and you need the right mental energy. So, a lot of the work I end up doing is at night. but I work like at night because I just did I work two jobs. So, I do teaching and then I do an after-school program. Yeah. It's all decision fatigue. You're making a lot of snap decisions during the day, I bet. So, what I've found out is that I need to do a lot of journaling in order to get all my thoughts out and then I basically do all of my coding on paper because the only time I have to work is like when I'm brain dead. So, like I usually just trust my morning self and I do a lot of coding in my head at like school or before I go to bed, I'll work some stuff out. But then I'll come in at night, I'm just a zombie who just does what my earlier self told you to do. Yeah, and so I type stuff in, see if it works. If it doesn't work, I usually like get really frustrated. >> note for future self like, "Hey, I just like yeah, I do. I comment it and I'm like, "Need to fix this." And I make a big list. >> Audi. Exactly. >> where you're like Yes, it is very much Severance. >> where he's like hey Pinar, you got to do this tonight. And then you write back like Hey, hey, it didn't work. >> This didn't work. Like there's a huge bug in there. And obviously I'm not a I can still debug and stuff, but I'm just not It works so much better on the weekend where like after this I'm going to code for probably like 4 hours and just on the weekend is my time. And I have an amazing partner. She makes breakfast, lunch, and dinner at for the entire week on Sundays. And so she just like feeds me all this healthy food. Like eating super healthy is amazing. Yeah. And that is huge. Like having someone do like outsourcing the food part cuz I love to cook and can cook for myself, but food noting everything out and then I also I since the winter hit, I have not been going to the gym. I used to go four times a week. Now I just have a pull-up and dip bar in my basement and I've been using that, but it is not enough. But it is it's hitting that maintenance level for me. Yeah. [laughter] There's not enough time in the day. So, there's no perfect solution, but it's just getting the work in when I need and then the main thing is just like coding on paper. Yeah. How does YouTube fit into that? that's I never got to fully ask you this, but like that's why I've been trying to figure out like a faster way to make YouTube videos cuz a lot of my stuff is I'm not good at editing, but it is edited. I pull a ton of pictures and footage off the internet and try to sync it up with everything I'm saying. >> Thank you. that was very unedited though. Like I had >> It felt very edited, but it felt very you. Thank you. >> Not knowing you, but I'm like this felt like I could tell I have a friend who's a tea- he's an English teacher as well and I'm like we did some presentation thing and I'm like, oh I turn You kind of wanted there's a little a teacher presentation mode that you went into when you did it and I'm like there's a certain cadence and style of explaining something to someone who like does that for their living. I could feel that in that video and it was very well structured and it felt very edited in that like you don't say and you have good pausing. Like it is a really nice cadence to the video. >> So, thank you. Thank you so much. That is I use Dscript to cut all the ums out. So, >> [laughter] [laughter] >> That killed me. Yeah. But, you know, I did I >> [laughter] >> I There is a cadence. There is a rhythm. >> ums I didn't hear. There were There was like 140. So, like >> [laughter] >> there was definitely some ums and ahs there. I did leave some in. >> you. It does. It shows you how many. I was just trying to use it cuz I was trying I was like, "How do I want to use this. I don't want to do And then the PowerPoint I guess it looked edited. I literally as I was recording the video, I was I sat down, I turned on OBS, I hit a key on my keyboard to pause and play the recording. And I just started talking to the camera about what happened. I was like, "Here's my page. Here's how I got the reviews." Pause. What do I do next? Maybe I need a PowerPoint. Opened up PowerPoint. I was like, "Okay, what are the steps? Step one, I don't know, blah." Play. All right, step one is when you do this, blah. Pause. Okay, what did I do next? Like it was one take. I did it, you know, in the same time that the video was. I threw it into Dscript and then I uploaded it. So, like it was the fastest video I ever made and I was like, "Maybe I'll just do it like this from now on." You should do it like that from now on. Unless you want to be a YouTube content creator, right? Like if that's the future for you, which it could be fine. I said It's cool. People say. It's fine. >> People say. But you do it. I know that you're unedited most of the time or minimally edited. You turn the camera on, you talk about your thoughts. I don't know if you go back and chop some things out, but then >> Sometimes. That's great. >> Most of the times, no. I have a crappy camera and I've noticed that my the videos where I'm on the camera don't do as well. I don't have a nice background. I don't have I'm I used to be an audio engineer, so I understand audio, but like I refuse to upgrade this $10 Amazon mic. So. >> [laughter] >> It works. It does. So. Yeah. Do you have any tips for fast content? Or just, you know, what do you think? Does it matter? Is it all about the topic? Is it just about finding the right way? I guess my right way is PowerPoints cuz then I go into teacher mode. Yeah, it's finding your style. You have a lot of experience talking in front of people. So that's like I mean, that's a huge hurdle to get over. I think for me, my process is really like understanding what I want to talk about. Like it's just what am I interested in and that's my Friday video and typically I'll have at least a couple car rides during the week and I use that time to like do a test run of talking about the topic. That's huge. So just being able to be prepared and like one of the things that sucks is like there's like five points I didn't make in my video from yesterday about like how I would make a game this year had I if it was my first one like And so I just missed some points, which sucks, but I'm like it is what it is. And >> [laughter] >> I've I haven't watched that video. I literally just sat down and talked for and I hit pause I stopped and I'm like, oh, 12 minutes, perfect. Ship it. Done. Ship. >> Done. We're moving on and like Screenshot it The whole thing took less than 30 minutes to make, which is That's excellent. And 12 of those minutes was me talking to camera. You throw up like a little you've got a font that you like and you're done. Yep. I just got to >> the font if I'm bored and it's just me a picture of me and it's me and I've done there's a lot of pictures of me on my camera and most of them end up just being like >> [laughter] >> I just it's just me. And like there like you can scroll through my YouTube it's just there are a lot of the same smile. It's like a little smirk and like little hmm. I'm here. >> But it's like what? Game dev. Hmm. But people like that. They like you. They like that it's raw. I think people in everything saturated and over edited these days, so people want stuff to be a little bit more real. We can we have this nice positioning where we can be really human. I was coaching somebody and they had this template for the email they're going to send out to everybody and I was like I mean I it looks fine, but I would these people get hundreds of emails from AI bots all day long. What if you just had something stupidly human to be like, hey, solo developer working on my dream game. Here's it is. Thought you might like it. Here's the key. Let me know if you want, you know, to get early access when the full game comes out and, you know, thanks and then sign off on your name. Like we can be super human not super human, but like Super comma human. Yeah, yeah, super comma human. We can be authentically us right now and it has such good contrast to the AI slop that is out there. And that's probably the my advice to you. Just be yourself and you know, that's going to hit a certain audience and like I've tried to make a note tutorial videos recently. No one cares anymore. Which is awesome. I don't want to make a note tutorial videos. I'm a dumb programmer. I'd much rather talk about my feelings and emotions than I would talk about here's how I use my animation player node. It's This is why it's great and this is why Payne Robinson is dumb. >> [laughter] >> Take that, Payne Robinson. Animation players are the best. >> [laughter] >> I just think it's a good other revenue source. That's the only thing cuz I'm trying to figure out how to get off of my until like my fiance is like, until we pay off the mortgage, you can't quit your job. And I was like, okay. So either have to make a hit game or I got to get YouTube to pay me enough money to like >> take the money you made from executing so go buy like scratchers or something. >> [laughter] >> Until I just make it big. Just buy Bitcoin. So many scratchers. She would be so pissed. She was I make jokes about just like throwing it into Bitcoin and she's like, I swear if you do that, I will end you. Like she's very Italian. And very Russian, so she's like very like passionate and >> Beautiful. Yes. It's incredible. where I like to end the conversation and it sucks that I have yoga cuz I'm also having a good time talking to you. So that just means we'll have to have more conversations or you'll have to come to IGDA and >> I will definitely. I when I will there will be time. I will come. Awesome. Well, let me know when you do that so then I can come to that meeting as well. What I like to end the conversation on is how do you manage scope creep? What's your strategy? We've talked a little bit about it throughout the podcast, but if you had to give me an answer, what's your There is a segment. You said there were no segments. There's a segment at the end. >> There's a segment Scope creep. Segments. You need like music like theme music. How do you manage scope creep? BLAH. YOU KNOW, LIKE SOMETHING. I'll probably do the creeper noise too in there somewhere. Right, that would be great. Yeah. How do I manage scope creep? Yeah, that's a big issue right now. My artist is chew. He is so good. We will be talking and he will be drawing a comic of everything I'm explaining in like perfect detail and it's all incredible. Like cuz that's how I just how he thinks. He thinks with his hand. So I'm like ah and so every idea that I >> on your thing you're like, that looks really cool. Let's go in that. Yes. And it looks like the game cuz he draws it as a game screen. So he draws what's happening when I'm explaining and style and I'm like, god damn it, that looks so good. We should put that in the game. And then I'm like, no. That's not the original idea that you had. So now that I'm actually working with an artist full-time and not just commissioning his art, that has been really hard to manage the scope creep cuz all of the ideas that he ends up drawing look so cool. I want to put them in the game. So I think how I'm going to try and do it is by writing down the core ideas that I want. Like I mentioned with execute, it was buttons and static animations. And I think I'm just going to try to do that with this next game within the next couple of weeks while I'm working on it and just put it on a sticky note. Stick it on my computer so that every time I'm working on it, I just come back to those ideas and just try to >> come back to have here's the core idea of the game and like filter any of the scope creep through that and say, does this serve that? >> Yes. Definitely. Hmm. >> Yeah. And it's always I think I'm because I have so much stuff going on, I it is I'm forced to cut stuff all the time because I don't have time. So that naturally also be extra busy. Like even if you're if dev is your full-time job, go to more yoga classes. Like join another club. Like do other stuff that makes you too busy to add scope to your game. Why are you forced to cut stuff? Because I have a buddy of mine who is my project manager and we work together and he sits down with me and he is he's the instructional coach at our school. So he's just a great teacher. So he's very good at just like structuring things. and I have him do that for me for this game. So he makes me write everything down. we talk over every decision and he forces me to have deadlines and be like, all right. When's this going to happen? And he's like you said and we can push it if we need to, but it's like deadlines are always the answer. I know you wanted me to say Yes. it's always the answer, right? That's the funny answer. That's a stupid answer. Nobody wants deadlines. No, it's the OP answer. Deadlines are so helpful because now it's like I'm busy in my life. You know exactly how many hours you spend every week like and based off of that and the deadline, you can do quick math to say, well yeah, that art was really good, but I simply don't have the time. But the problem is how do you know? How do you know what you need to cut until you get to the point where the game is like I at this point I'm like, the game has to be playable in order for me to understand what needs to be in it and what doesn't need to be in it. So like what if it takes me 2 months to make the game playable? How am I supposed to put a deadline on that? >> [snorts] >> That's the problem. Yeah. Damn it. >> [laughter] >> Well, thank you very much for coming on here. I'll have to have you on again to talk about this project when you get a little bit more further down the way or just to chat some more. It was a very fun time to chat with you. >> It was nice to meet you finally. I've seen you all around YouTube and I've seen your pods. Did you try to like fast forward through anything I was talking about to like Yeah, you I was like, all right, god, this guy just keeps talking about like mesh instances. My god. >> [laughter] >> He's dyslexic, okay? We get it. You're dyslexic, okay? Move on. No, man, it was great. Have fun at yoga. Thanks for having me on. Appreciate you giving me some time here. So. Awesome. Thank you very much. Talk to you soon. Peace. And that was Robinson. Like I said before, this conversation felt like I was talking to a friend that I had known for years and spoiler, I this is my first time talking with Payne. If you have not checked it out at this point, go check out execute. It is $6. It's on sale. There's even a bundle between both execute and a game about feeding a black hole. If you want to check that out, it's a little over $10 to support both of us here. And then Payne also has a really great YouTube channel by the name Payne Robinson and you can check it out over here. He had a nice I mean, look at not even 100,000 view video chatting about the success of execute and you're going to want to follow this developer. He's got more cooking as we're talking about here kind of ideas and things he wants to do. And just a lovely developer that I hope to become somebody who's part of my local community of game developers and my local support system and somebody that I'm going to try to be reaching out with and hanging out with and discussing. I simply It was one of those things where you like you sometimes you meet people in your life and you're like, "Wow, this person's fun to talk to and I enjoy like the you your wavelengths are just in sync." And this is what it felt like. I literally like left that conversation and was like, "Hey man, can we grab dinner sometime? Like I want to go and like hang out." And >> [laughter] >> we don't have to do it in a podcast setting and record it for the internet. Like I just simply just like I enjoyed talking to you and I would like to do it again. So, grab a dinner with him at some point later and you know, it's just funny how stuff like that works out. So, yeah. That's it. I hope you're having a good time. The I hope your start of the new Year's been going well and I know a lot of people, myself included, sometimes do New Year's resolutions and things like that. I have gotten into the mindset of just if I want to make a change to make it, but I am doing Dry January from THC. Initially back in the day when I was drinking alcohol and really kind of suffering from alcoholism and addiction to that stuff, I would do Dry January to prove to myself that I was in control of my habits and then come back in February and start drinking again. Well, 5 years ago this time I did I wanted to try to do a dry year and I got 3 months into that challenge. Like this is something that I feel like toxic masculinity like to like challenge ourselves towards something and I did dry year back in 2021 and I got 3 months into that and I've never looked back. So, I don't know what your new Year's resolutions are. give yourself grace and know that sometimes change is really hard and that you can always restart the New Year's resolution and as my therapist is kind of encouraging me to do to find an intention for the year and I'm not quite sure what that word is yet, but as soon as I do find out my intention word for the year, I'll let you know. I've been Airmid. Thank you so much for watching. I'll see you in the next one. Bye-bye.
