Article title: You're Missing The Best Time Ever To Make A Video Game
Author/Speaker: Chris Zukowski, interviewed by Blake Gocey
Date: 2026/04
Source Url: https://youtu.be/VAyuJDCDkZY?si=briyapUCtNzZJi5b

18% of gaming sessions on Steam involve a controller. The rest of them are mouse and keyboard. I won't pick up my keyboard cuz it's tied in. But so, most PC gaming is focused around mouse and keyboard. And so, when I say "short games", there isn't a length because here's the thing is if you design the right genre, the length is infinite or nearly infinite. But the ones that are really popular are for these short games are going to be your management sims. Kind of like shop managers and you have to be very restricted. I'm interviewing somebody who's doing a management game that did pretty well. You've got some incrementals, big ones. Those are the big ones. And then, now I will violate the rule a little bit and say the ones where you do control the main character are Friend Slop. Typically those are, but the controls are so bad that it's almost like you're not controlling a main character. And so, that's Friend Slop. I do think horror is good. Horror narrative which goes back to using just clicking the buttons, you know, like, oh, do you want to explore this or that or this room? And then you just click a button. Those are big. Um and then um kind of maybe Vampire Survivor likes. And all you're doing, yes, you control the main character, but it's very cardinal directions. There's not a lot of like jumping and stuff. And so, those kind of games are what I consider these smaller games. And they're very genre focused. And what I mean by smaller games is not they're not they're short. It's just that the way the game design is oriented, the game is re-playable and most of the content is numbers that you've set into a spreadsheet that's like, you know, like Black Hole or an Incremental where it's like, you gain it this much and then you add this new button and then you gain it this much. So, most of that tuning and level design is just a spreadsheet where you're updating values everywhere. So, those kind of aspects of it are what make a short game possible by a small team. So, it's not that you're making a Metroidvania in a very short way. It's a very specific genre set that can satisfy this kind of place, I should say. Yeah, is that Do you think that's because more on the player expectation side with those kind of games or is it more just that it's so much more manageable to actually complete and balance and adjust in the dev side? Uh say I Say the question again. I'm not sure if I understand it. Yeah, I I guess I'm kind of saying the reason these genres that you've mentioned where you're just you're not moving a player, is that because that players on Steam just happen to like those games more or is it for a small developer or a new developer, they're actually just easier to make and so you're more likely to succeed that way or maybe it's both. Uh yeah, I'm going to say both. Why not both? these games are very consumable. In other words, there are genres and purely culture. There's nothing there. There are genres where they deep dive. Like city builders, uh 4X, very popular on Steam. They do very well, but there's a huge lock-in where when you play a city builder, you lock in, you learn every system or like a Factorio style game. And so, what we find is players will specialize in one, maybe two. Maybe they buy one to two a year. And so, they lock in. So, it's very hard like they do very well, but they're very hard to make and they're very I wouldn't say they're competitive cuz not many get made, but the people who do buy them lock in for a long time. So, it's there is there is a high threshold, I should say. Whereas my theory is that these games that I'm talking about like the Incrementals, the narrative games, the horror games. Did I mention horror before? That those That is one where you kind of walk around. So, you are controlling the main character which is a first-person shooter. Uh controls basically. Um and some of these like slot machine style games are um they're very consumable. And so, the fan base for that by no just by culture. There's nothing no special reason. They just like to play a lot of them. So, they'll play through a narrative game or they'll play through a horror game and then want another one. And most horror games are an hour or so. And so, they're all genres where the audience is very hungry and they will buy dozens of these games every year. And so, they're much more omnivorous. They're willing to take a shot on a game. And so, you're much easier you have much easier chance of breaking through because the audience is much hungrier. And but and this is why I call it the golden age is because at the same time, these games just by happenstance are easier to make. They're very well There could be an alternate universe where the games that that buy a lot are Factorio style games that are very hard to make, but we don't live in that universe. We magically live in this universe where the games that people consume a lot of are also very easy very easy. I should say that as somebody who just complained that I have no I have mittens for hands uh to make. They can be made in a short time. So, we kind of live in this in one regard a a cool universe. Yeah, so you've mentioned that you've, you know, done this for several years. Do you feel like this is a sort of new meta that's formed and things have actually sort of shifted or has this maybe always been a strategy that just the community's kind of getting wise to now? Hmm, that's a good question. Um I think I actually don't know. Hey, okay, I have a couple of theories and I was talking to a dev who made a friend slot game that did well. And they said they think it's Roblox. They've aged out of Roblox and they played a lot of Roblox games, but they don't want to hang out with like 9-year-olds anymore. And then maybe they're in college or high school and they're like, "Listen, we got a little money. I have a I have a part-time job at the grocery store. I got a little bit of money to spend. So, I'm willing to get out of Roblox, stop hanging out with 9-year-olds so that just me and my bros can hang out and play. And we'll pay $5 for this game. I'll play it." And they think that that might be the reason why friend slot in particular is kind of multiplayer co-op experiences are popping off. I have a theory that remember that game banana, that indie game banana? Uh the idle game. That kind of took off because there was there was kind of a speculative market. My theory is a lot of people played banana and they're like, "Hey, this is actually kind of fun." And then they're like, "This is fun. Let me try another one." And then they got addicted to it and then idle games popped off. And then uh Vampire Survivors likes popped off and I don't know why that. It could be an evolution. I don't know exactly. I mean, I know why that one took off, but it could be an evolution where people started mixing in rogue-like elements into these things. And so, for folks, rogue-like people always ask me like, "Is rogue-like popular? Is it still popular?" The thing about rogue-like is it is now evolved into not being a genre. It's more like a structure. It's like saying, "Are levels still big, Chris? Can you still make games with levels? Or hey, what about games that have cutscenes?" So, rogue-like is just a structure. Or what about Metroidvania structure? But it's met you know, rogue-like is just a structure where it's like you play a little game and it's real hard and then you die and then you can spend points on we'll say rogue-lite. And then you spend points from your first run and then it's a little easier and maybe you get a little further and then you spend points and then one time randomly all these specials line up and you can go really far because you got a really good roll and you built a big engine for some of these games and then you're like really good. And so, that core game loop that I just experience explained is very fun. And it's very good and we can go into other reasons why for game designers it's a very good system. And so, you can build a whole bunch of different types of games on top of this layer called rogue-lite. So, I think you could a a lot of a popular one, like I said, this gambling games like um slots and daggers, but you can also do there's a whole thing where you basically take a carnival game and then you just add that you build it on top of that layer. So, like dungeon crawler, there's Peglin. All these games where it's like a very simple stupid arcade game, but you made it complex by layering the rogue-like level structure on top of it and that does very well. So, that is something where it's like we may have innovated our way into this kind of game that is that is really fun and easy to make. I again, I say easy even though I have mittens for hands. So, that's my thought theories. What is your theories? What do you think? Yeah, I like both the Roblox and the banana theory. Um I don't know. I don't think I have any theories at the moment. I haven't I haven't released a Steam game, so yeah, I'll leave the theory crafting to you for now, but appreciate you asking. Yeah. Um would you say that you would recommend developers of all level be making these games right now? Like I mean, would you give the same advice to a very beginner first Steam game or do you think if someone, let's say they've released two or three games that they felt like were successful, um should they just continue to follow this meta or is there any developers that could maybe be better suited to make a longer game or one of those bigger genres? Or what would you say to that? Yeah, I think it's uh for any level, really. Um like um the uh one of the people that is in my same coming my inside conference is the Butterscotch Shenanigan guys. Do you know those guys? Yes, yeah, I've recently found their podcast. They're a lot of fun. Yeah, they're uh state they're like they released a big game called Crashlands 2. It took them like years. I think it took them like two or three years to make Crashlands 2. And then they were just burned out. They were like tired of it and it took them so long. And the game did okay, but fantastic. And they're like, "Oh my god, we're so burned out. Let's just make this silly little game." And it's a kind of management game where you don't control the main character, you just drop It's kind of like a rogue-like deck builder in secret. It's the same structure of it. Like you randomly get some dudes and you drop them into an arena and they battle a little bit. And you just push buttons like "Send more dudes." Um and they were like they've now made more wish lists. They haven't The game's not sold yet. So, we don't know how it's going to sell. They have earned more wish lists from the silly game that's taken them less than 9 months than they did in Crashlands 2, which took them like two to three years. And so, that's why I'm like, "Folks, do it." And I even recommend if you're a solo dev, I mean, if you've got like a contract like you're in a publisher agreement and you need to like finish your game, yeah, finish it, but if you can, folks, take a month or two and jam out a game and just put it on itch and see if it kind of takes off. Uh and you can go to howtomarketagame.com/benchmarks for what take off means because I track and I did a big survey for people who have put out itch games. Like what is a good itch game? What are the numbers that look like for good itch game that's sold well. And so, I can I have numbers there if you want to see what what's a good game. And it just it speed runs you into finding out what a good game actually feels like because my general theory here here's the the the big theory is that like you know within a month of like showing your game off to the internet whether any way like itch.io, Steam, or whatever, or trailers on a YouTube channel, you know whether your game is going to have it within the first month. It either goes or it doesn't. Um or if you put out a demo, you'll know within the first month of putting out your demo uh whether your game has it. And so, I think devs in general are spending way too long grinding on a game that has just over and over proven not to have it. And you can look at my benchmarks page for all the benchmarks. Put your game in there. It's just like if that's your case, either time out, try another game, or just like ship what you got and just move on to your next game. It's just like they're just spending way too long on a game that just has no chance in the market. So, that's why I'm like, "Everybody just try it. Just take a break. Chill out." [laughter] Yeah, thank you for posting that benchmarks page. That's a huge help. That actually probably answers so I I have a Discord and I asked people if they had any questions for you. And one of the questions was something along the lines of like, "When do I know to kind of give up on a project or just sort of sort of move forward?" So, your question's been answered. Go check out the benchmarks page. Well, well, well, let me I'll give them if that's a specific question. I'll give you the I'll give you that person. Thank you for asking that question. Here's what I'd do. Okay. You got to first answer this question. Is your game like are you like a really good artist? Like your art is your like, "This game looks good. I'm really good at art. This is the most beautiful game I can possibly make." That's the shining star. That's my unique selling proposition is it just looks good. Okay, if that's your case, here's what you're here's my advice for you. Put it out. Make some shorts, YouTube shorts. Make um X put it on X. Put it on social media. Make some trailers on YouTube of showing off the best of your art in your game. And a little bit of gameplay stuff and just be like, "Here's the game." Have you ever gone viral? Like have you have you earned a thousand wish lists from like a tweet or something? Or you post it on Reddit like r/games and they don't pull down your post and they keep it up and it gets like 10,000 wish lists from a Reddit post. Did they? Hmm? That is a sign that you've got it. Um or does Japanese Twitter go crazy for it? Um and retweets you and stuff cuz Japanese Twitter's a thing. Uh search my blog for Japan Twitter. And then another thing is okay, if you're like, "No, no, no, I'm not an artist, but our game is like super deep. We're like Dwarf Fortress 2. That's essentially what we are." And you're like, "Okay, put out a demo. Put it on itch. Send it around to content creators and say, 'Hey, play our demo.'" It's on itch for free. You don't even have to install it. It's right there in the browser. And does it get and I don't know the numbers offhand. I think it's like 5,000 views or something. Go to howtomarketagame.com/benchmarks for itch.io stats. Do you get that 5,000 plays, I think it is, or views? I can't remember. Check it out on benchmarks page. Does it do that? Do people play it? It's a free game. If people don't want to play your free game for free, what why would you think that charging money's going to do it? And so, if that's the case, then you got to say, "Time out. What are we doing here?" Then I do think people should finish some games. Like if you've got if you're like part of this learning. You learn by releasing. So, if you're like, "Hey, we got Look, and I can wrap it up in the next month. Sure, wrap up this game that doesn't have it, send it out. You're going to get bad reviews or just no reviews. But, learn from that and then try another one. Um I do think it's important to at least do the complete process so you learn, but don't If you're like, "What?" Cuz sometimes I'll ask devs like, "Hey, how's the game going?" They're like, "Oh, we got like probably 3 more years of dev." I'm like, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no. No, wrap it up." And so, if you're not If you don't have it, figure out how you can wrap it up, be creative, just add a randomizer where every enemy comes out of the walls to to get you and then call that a game and send it out and then work on try Try again. Make another game and then another one and another. It just takes time. It just takes a lot of releases before you learn how to make games. Okay, yeah. So, so many little things I want to go into there. Uh and I did find in my notes that question was from Ben. So, thanks for asking, Ben, and thanks, Chris, for answering Thanks, Ben. Um Now, in So, so want to want to ask you a couple questions about demos and I have one thing about Butterscotch Shenanigans, but but I'll I'll stick with the flow of the conversation for now before before I get ahead of myself. Um I I have been asking or thinking a lot about this idea of prototyping. Um I've heard a lot of people talk about it and in particular, Jonas was like, "Well, now I did a bunch of prototyping, but now I think maybe you just prototype the fantasy." Um So, anyway, I'm just curious for you, do you have any And I mean, I'm I'm kind of considering this with launching a demo on itch to be maybe sort of all part of this, but but what do you think is a a healthy amount of prototyping for a game? Are you considering that just getting a demo up? What would you consider prototyping or a healthy prototyping phase? Yeah, I think this pertains to people who have never made a game. The most important thing is you got to get games out there. Guys, just you got to like for me, it's just like Okay, here's a Here's what I've seen working. Okay, this is what works. Okay. And And then a good test case for this is Do you know the game um uh what's it called? Uh Root Trees Are Dead. Do you know that game? Not familiar. Okay. Go to my blog. I did a whole case study on this. Search my blog for Root Trees Are Dead. And what this guy did, he's actually local. Go Phoenix devs. Um he made a game jam game. Took a weekend, did a game jam, I think it was Global Game Jam. Took a weekend, put this game up on itch. And the early responses were pretty good. People like, "Put it on free for itch." And people are like, "Hey, this is actually pretty good." And then uh he was like, "Yeah, yeah, it is doing good." So, then what he did was he took a month and he polished it up, added some more puzzles. It's like a narrative puzzle kind of like um an Oberdin style puzzle detective game. And he extended it for a month and people were going crazy for this free game. Still free on itch. And then that was the sign and so he went and he hired a new artist, he worked with a coder, um and then through a series of longer development, this one I think about a year and a half or maybe, put out the full version which had the core itch, but double twice as much content, uh had a whole second chapter and everything, put it out, sold fantastic because it was proven in there. And it's not like you would think, a free game on the itch for a month did like why wouldn't people be like, "No, I don't want to buy that. It's free on itch." Didn't matter. Didn't matter. It actually his sales went phenomenal because the game looked better, the game had more content, it was still core game, but so you can do it. So, the Here's the risk that I see a lot of people do is they make a game, they're like, "We're going to make a puzzle platformer." They They uh put it out. They They've never made a game before, by the way. They've never made a game. And so, they they put out They make like the first level and they're like, "You know what? This is fun. We're going to make the full game. We prototyped it. It's fun. You know what? That's not a prototype." And they like they kind of convince themselves that it's fun and they've never made a game, so they don't know what's fun. And they've never market validated it. Like whatever they made, it was going to be considered fun. Like this prototype is fun, let's develop the whole thing. My My better recommendation is again, try the game jam plus 1 month and do that three to four times, put that all up on itch, and then whichever one does the best, you've now spent like 4 months doing this. Whichever one does the best and you look at the views and you look at the benchmarks page, make that one to a full game. You've now validated. It's not It still might not have it, but you got to You all have to just make games, okay? You can't optimize forever. You got to You got to get to the end. So, you pick one that does the best, develop that into a full game, ship that, and then just try that again. That's my basic recommendation for prototype because I see a lot of devs they convince themselves that their prototype is fun even though they've never made a game, so what do they know? They've never validated with the externals and they're too They're kind of scared to I We haven't talked about that, but that's a big thing. It's like, "I don't want to put the prototype out." And so, they're scared because somebody's going to look at it and be like, "This is crap." And then they're going to like hurt their feelings and then never going to make a game again, which is a understandable fear, but they they hide that fear into like, "Well, I don't want to share it because then it'll ruin the surprise and you know, and then people will know it and they won't buy it on Steam." That's none of that is true. You just got to ship. And so, um put it out there. Make it public. Let people play it. Yeah, let's assume that someone takes your advice. They make four prototypes in 4 months. They post them on itch and they're they found their best one. They're ready to go. What What's their next steps for marketing? Okay, what they do is make a Steam page and just wait. Don't put up Don't publish it. Make a trailer. And then I'm going to say no publisher. Don't do a publisher. No publishers. It gets too complicated and you're making small games. Even though you've picked your prototype, I'd still say make this game in 9 months. We're going to say 9 months. Let's pretend 9 months, okay? So, you've made a trailer. And what you do is you reach out to as many um I've got a festival page, howtomarketagame.com/festivals, okay? And you're still sitting You haven't put up made the page live. I've got this howtomarketagame.com/festivals. Boom, I just dropped it in the links down below. Um and just look and look for stuff. Usually, it's like there's a month of the game you know, like in other words, like the the festival's coming in a month and they're asking for people to apply for these virtual online festivals. And you say, "Hey, we're going to announce our game." Let's just say this all happens January cuz this makes it easier. So, January, let's pretend this is happening in January and you're going to ship the game in September. That's 9 months. Okay, so let's pretend that there's a festival in February that's put on and they're open for success suggestions. You say, "Hey, February, I'm going to announce my game. Here's a picture of it." Uh we'd love to be in the festival. You would be the one to have the announce. You would announce it. And then you wait and you hope because you validated with those play tests that it's fun and it's beautiful or cool looking. It's a neat idea. And it doesn't matter. I know I'm saying like you get the exclusive announce and you're like, "But you just announced it on Twitter or on itch." No, no, no, no. That's totally it is totally separate thing. You're like, "We're announcing the Steam version." That still matters. That's still impressive for festival organizers. You don't even have to mention itch. You don't even have to say it existed on itch. You can just say like you know, we got this new game we're going to announce on Steam. Nobody checks, first of all. And it's not that you're lying, it's just that it's a whole new thing. Hopefully, you get an announcement and you launch your Steam page the day the festival goes live, da da da da, and you also reach out to IGN and you say, "Got a new trailer. Would you like the exclusive?" And then you send it and they might be like, "Eh, it's not that good. Let's put it on Game Trailers." They put it on Game Trailers, which is lesser IGN's YouTube channel, and you might get some visibility. And then you reach out to the Japanese Twitter and you go, "Hey, Japanese Twitter, this game's awesome." It doesn't matter if it's localized or whatnot. Japanese Twitter loves cool stuff. They have very good taste. If Japanese Twitter doesn't pick you up, your game All of that stuff, get a big bang right at the front, hopefully good stuff happens, and then you go from there. Try and get your demo out from there. Try and get your demo out as soon I would say like January to September, get your demo out by March. Uh again, try and do a festival announce with your demo and say, "Hey, we got this demo. It's going live for the first time. Would you like the exclusive to get us into this festival?" Hopefully, they do. Reach out to a bunch of content creators. Launch a demo with content creators. Hopefully, it's fun. And then you just ride that wave for as long as you can and then pop out the last Next Fest before you launch, which if you're launching in September, that would be June. Hopefully, by June, you got a pretty good demo that's been out. Launch a demo on on uh update your demo, put in Next Fest, again, do some of that stuff, get into the June Next Fest, pop that out, um and then fix your demo some more, do some more content creator stuff, and then launch in September. And that You could do all of that. Somebody Ben, somebody in the Discord could do all of that and still have no wish list cuz your game just doesn't have it. Like you applied for festivals, you applied to content creators, and you did all that stuff, and nothing happened. You say, "I learned a lot and I had fun along the way." And you do it all over again. It just folks, your first five to 10 games are going to suck donkey. It's going to be the worst thing. And you just got to get through it and you got to do it again. And you got to get back up on the donkey or the horse, whatever metaphor we want to do, and you just do it again and again. And this is a long game. It took Tyler Glaiel 56 games to do this. 56. Now, his games are very more than that. He He knocked them out in a week, but you got to get some games out. Well, there's the game plan, guys. Get after it. Just do it. I'll see you in 9 months. Let me let me put on my skeptic commenter hat that I occasionally get in my comment section. Yep. Uh-huh. There we go. Very good. Very good. There will be someone that says, "Well, you know, you need a following to get wish list on Steam. So, does a following even matter on Steam cuz it's algorithmic? Does it actually give you a boost? Does it matter at all? Do you need it Do you need a following to get started?" Actually, that wasn't I was expecting a little harder criticism or something. [laughter] No, you don't you don't need a following. It doesn't matter. Especially on social media, social media has now drifted away from having a following. A following helps, don't get me wrong. But it does not and this is part of the reason why I say make some more more more more games. You can it is not necessary. I always mix up my necessary versus sufficient. But it is not necessary. You can do very well with no following. However, I have found when you have a bigger following like part of my benchmarks, somebody always ask, "What about my first 2 weeks? How many wish lists should I get in my first 2 weeks?" I did a study you can look it up on benchmarks. I think it's called first 2 weeks. I've found games that have been had developers who had previous releases overwhelmingly like the games that had the best 2 weeks all were subsequent games like their third or fourth game. So, if you have released other games, yes, your first 2 weeks will do much better if on the averages than most games. But that is not If you make a crappy game 2 weeks before, like if you if you have made a crappy game and it's like your fourth game, still it's not that great like having that first 2 weeks and it's not it's not a death sentence or the answer to have that first 2 weeks be good. It doesn't matter though. Your following is not necessary. You know what it is? A good game. Unfortunately, you have to make a good game. I wish we didn't. I wish we could make the worst game possible that we'd just crap out and then have a big following. It doesn't work. Steam is based on people liking the game. So, unfortunately, we have to make a good game. But following doesn't matter. It does can help but not necessary. Okay, yeah. Thanks for clarifying that. Just to back up a little bit, you mentioned that before you even hit go live on your Steam page that you should have a trailer. Do you have any tips for what actually makes a good trailer? How would one begin? I feel like that would be a difficult task to make one good if you're not a video editor. I mean, if you're a game dev, you can figure it out. But but what tips do you have for making a good trailer? I don't. Well, like I will. I'll make some stuff up for you. But go to Derek Liu. He's got a great I think it's just Derek Liu.com. Just Derek Liu trailers, you'll find him. He has a good blog and some good advice. But generally, the mistakes we always see Derek and I we we've done several talking sessions. Derek and I have traveled the world together looking teaching people how to make games. Here's the big ones that we always yell at people for. Slow intro where it's like a slow battlefield and you're like, "In a world where the seven keys of M Twosler have fallen into the wrong hands. Lord Higginbotham, keeper of the flame of Anternia." And it's like all the yeah yeah yeah and it's just like slow pan over a battlefield. Cut all that stuff out. Just lop it off. Just go into anything and just cut all that stuff out. No logos in the beginning. Show gameplay right up front where it's just like, "Oh, gameplay that identifies the genre." Like, "Oh, I'm clicking to increase stuff." And then after that after those big things, I'm a complete loss. I don't know how to make trailers. But what I would recommend here's what I would recommend cheap way so that um that you don't know. Pick games that are very similar genre to yours, okay? And if you don't know what your genre is and you're like, "But I'm not a genre. I'm all the genres." Okay, you got a you got bigger problems. But anyway, so you got to know the games that are near you and here's what I would do. Get out a pencil. Get out a little notepad and push a trailer for a game that's very similar to yours genre-wise and then pause it. Every time there's a cut, pause it right where the cut is. What's happening? Play it again. Pause it and then next time there's a cut, write down what happened in that seconds. And then just mirror the speed of the cuts and what's happening and go for the good ones. Go for the good games. And just note and observe what is in that trailer. Just do it. Do it. And don't pick a triple-A game because triple-A games are playing on a different game than you are. Pick a trailer that is what I thought what I say which is no logo in the beginning, no slow opening, right into gameplay. Pick those trailers and do this activity. And you're just playing the childhood of game of what is different and just copy and I'm not saying literally copy. But the genres have a template and it is not bad to kind of copy that template. For example, horror games, indie horror games always start with this. You go and it's a camera of a player going and then it goes whip pan. You do a whip pan and then it shows the monster like and it like breaks through a door and goes ah the monster does. And then whip pan BACK AND GO AND THEN it like a tentacle hits you in the face and then it's the logo of the game and it says like you know, like squid monster coming soon. And then you then cut and you show a little bit slower and you show the rest of the game and how the different things are like whether there's puzzles in them horror game or whether you're like blowing things away that's like a gun-based horror game and you're showing those things. That formula is awesome and that's where you write down the times like, "How long do we show the guy going When does the whip pan to the monster happen? How long do we show the monster?" That's what you're taking notes on and it's going to be a range. But then that's what you do and I think too many devs they think that they're inventing the wheel. But you really aren't. That's part of marketing is it's a lot of just confirming what people already intuitively know. So, horror fans are like, "Ah, it's it's those things. Okay, what's the monster? Oh, I see the monster. Okay. There's puzzles. Got it. Okay, yeah, I got it." And that that's what you're doing with marketing. It's not you don't win by being the most original and I think that's the biggest thing indie devs have to learn for the first time is like you aren't special snowflake. You're kind of like getting in line and you're like, "I'm this type of game." It's not until you're a very advanced in your career you're like a Tyler Glaiel who has made 56 games that you can be like, "You know what? I'm going to overturn the apple cart and really change things." You got to know your place and it's like you're a first time dev making a game that's in a genre that's established, follow the tropes. Just follow. I know it's boring. I know it's not fun. But that's what it takes. I'm sorry. I hate to be boring. Yeah, no, thank you for that. All right. So, at this point someone has validated their idea on itch. They made a Steam page. They stole a great trailer like an artist. They're going to get into some festivals and then now I do have a couple questions for you about demos. I'm wondering I've been thinking about this idea and maybe it's just in my head and not a real idea. So, this is why I wanted to ask. But is there any is there anything that is like a sort of demo velocity? Like is it better to wait with a demo to launch it on Steam during next fest to try to get the most eyes? Should you just make it as early as possible to make it as good as possible going into next fest? How should I be thinking about maybe optimizing my demo? Okay, you want to get that demo out as soon as you can and still have quality. Now, this is a hard part and this is the when I say with quality. People ask me, "Should I I don't know if my demo's ready yet." And it's like, "I don't know. Not until I play it can I tell you." And I don't I'm not doing commission. Like don't hire me. Don't ask if you can hire me to look at your demo or say, "Chris, can you look at my demo?" I I don't have time and I'm not accepting commissions. Ask a really cool dev friend who's made games and released them. Just like I did. When I remember I I said I I I sent an email and the guy had like 1,000 edits to make. Once you've got done that to a cool game dev friend in Blake's community, you can do it in Blake's community. Say, "Hey, review my demo." And then you just give him a private build. After you've made all those changes and as good as you can make it, then put that demo out. And what's good, you just learn that after making a lot of releases. There's no I can't tell you there's no clear formula to do it. You just you got to learn what what's good and bad. And so, you take that and then you put your demo out. And I do not again on the benchmarks how to market a game.com/benchmarks, there's one for Steam next fest and we have found the best correlation to success in Steam next fest is how many wish lists you have coming into it. It is not velocity. Some a lot of people are like, "Well, I bet it's velocity. That's the number wish list is old. It's now velocity. I've tested it. The correlation is stronger to the number of wish lists you have going into next fest. Now, the the correlation is slightly it's still big but it's slightly less for velocity. But you have to remember correlation does not equal causation. Someone's going to write that. Correlation does not equal causation but typically what will happen is a game that has a lot of wish lists, they probably know what they're doing and they probably know how to market their game. So, they also have done where you go into next fest and you hit it hard with a lot of promotion so you get that velocity going into next fest. So, they're both correlated both velocity and wish lists. But basically, those you don't get to choose. It's not like when you submit to next fest it's like, "Do you want to come in with velocity or wish lists?" Huh? No, they both come. If your game is good and hot, you both have a lot of wish lists and you have a lot of velocity. And there's survivorship bias here because you'll see a lot of people like, "Oh, I wish lists are old. I went in with zero wish list, but I had a lot of velocity." Well, let me tell you, I've seen the data. There are lots of games that went in with low wish lists, and they had a little bit of velocity, and it did nothing. It is It is the number of wish lists. Don't let people on Reddit tell you like, "Oh, the new thing is velocity." It's not. It's not. I know there was one game that did it and not there. And you know what kind of game that was? An incremental. [laughter] Because it's a hot genre. Um but anyway, so and we have found and I can in the benchmarks, you can map it out. I have seen like how many wish lists you have going into Next Fest, and I can tell you the range of how many you're going to get in Next Fest, and it's very accurate. Like I've seen so many people like, "Yeah, I just followed Chris's thing and it literally plugged in our numbers and we hit right in their range." [laughter] Um so, the thing is you want to get your demo out nice and early, so you build up that wish list a big wish list amount, so that when you go into Next Fest, you're coming in hot. And the thing is, when you get a lot of wish lists, you're going to get a lot of content creators who have played it to get you up there if your game's good. You can go back to those people just before Next Fest and say, "We're going in the Next Fest. You loved our game 6 months ago. You're going to love it this month. We've added every change that you recommended, and we even added a little special character for you if you hit the keys 1 2 3 5, uh your character is in the game." Ha. And then they'll be like, "Oh, cool. Let me play it." Don't actually do that, folks. I mean, unless your person's really big. But anyway, so then that person plays you just before Next Fest and then you get you get good. So, um that's how you do Next Fest. Okay, so the bonus of posting the demo early is uh is it just because content players can play it, or do pages with demos just naturally get more wish list? There's many reasons. One, makes your game better because people play and be like, "Man, I got stuck on level two. My graphics card doesn't work with this." And you're like, "Oh, it doesn't work? I didn't even know that was a graphics card. Okay, let me fix that. Okay, that works." You're just fixing all the basic problems cuz no matter how much you test it, by putting out a demo, you have a bigger player base that's going to find edge case bugs. They're like, "Oh, I run this on my laptop, and I'm also like grinding Bitcoins in the background." And that turns out that breaks your game. So, you fix that kind of stuff. So, one, it just makes the quality of your game better by by Next Fest. So, when a content creator does play it, it's not there. Or, two, it improves your game design cuz people are like, "God, the boss is way out of balanced after I played 10 minutes." Uh you got to fix that. You're like, "Oh, yeah. I got to nerf it a little bit." So, you like change the stats. That's number two. Number three is, content creating uh getting covered by a content creator is a long-term game. It's very [clears throat] slow. Like you put it out like they've usually scheduled their content out like two to three weeks. And so, when you reach out to them like, "Hey, do you like to play their game?" They could like your game. They're like, "That game's great, but I'm already booked and I've recorded and edited half the video, so you're going to get in line. You're got I'm not going to play your game for another like 3 months." And they don't even tell you that. That's just what's happening in real time. They don't say They don't email you back. They never do. It's just one day you'll just wake up and you'll have a lot of wish lists like, "Why?" And then you look on YouTube and somebody covered you. And it so, content creation is just slow. It's very slow. And then those content creators like one person will play it, and then 3 weeks later their buddy plays it, their content creator buddy, and then their content creator buddy plays it. And so, it's just a slow rolling sequence that takes months for it to happen. And so, all that grinds and grinds. If you join my inside conference, this is a spoiler alert. We're going to look at um the wish list chart for how many dudes the Crashlands devs, you know, the Butterscotch Shenanigans. We're going to go through their wish list chart, and this is what it looks like. They did a couple YouTube shorts like this, and then they did launch their demo, and it's just like Mount Doom. It's just like this huge like mountain range. And you get to see it like, "Oh, content creator found it." And then it dies down. "Content creator found it." Boom. And it's just like their chart is like half Mount Doom, half the the Shire, you know? And it's like rolling hills of the Shire, and then Mount Doom, and like Next Fest looks like it actually kind of look their Next Fest kind of looks like Mordor or something. It's just kind of got these prongs where you could like Anyway, what am I talking about? That's what it looks like. So, definitely get your demo out. Like it is you don't realize how much the demo just royal And I don't even know where it's coming from. Just having the demo out just gets your wish list up if your game's good. Okay, this is kind of getting some gears to turn for me. And so, it's kind of like two ideas. So, I'll just sort of throw it out, and if we need more clarification, I'll do my best. But let's go back to our imaginary scenario where we're going January to September. We throw that demo up nice and early. I'm kind of wondering like how much time should I is the demo Okay, well, let's start here. This will be the This will make the most sense of that working out. Should do you find that the best demos are exactly the first 20 minutes of the game, or are they sort of optimized? Like I know a game about feeding a black hole, it was a much steeper ramp in their demo to like fun, so to speak. It was not the regular flow of the game. So, is that a normal tactic you're seeing, or are most devs just putting Here's your 20 minutes, you get a timer. There's my game. Yeah, no. You got to You got to design your demo for being a demo. Here and I'm not a game designer. I have mittens for hands when it comes to game design. I don't know what I'm doing. I'm not good. So, don't follow my advice. I don't know that I don't know the specifics of demos, but I've played a lot of demos. And basically, what people do is they lop off they just lop off the the the tutorial. Okay? Most games are in a genre. The The successful games are in a genre, and you don't have to teach like, "Oh, to jump, push this." Like you might just have one button that says like the main menu like jump is A. And jump's always A. Or don't make a platformer, so you don't even have to worry about that. But like I think part of the reason incrementals are so easy to make is they're kind of self-tutorializing. You'll just see one button. There's only one button to push, and you're like, "Da da da." You don't have to have a tutorial that's like, "When you push the button, the numbers go up." It doesn't. It's just all built in. You just strip out all that tutorial, all the backstory lore, and you go into the most fun part. And I think I I'll ask him. I'm I'm going to be interviewing tomorrow. Like how they uh like tuned their thing, but I have heard a lot of devs ramp up the speed to get to the fun part really fast. And you want to hit that like first 10 minutes really fun. So, you're you're cutting to the good stuff. So, I would say cut to the good stuff. Not If you're making an RPG, which I don't recommend for Indies, um you wouldn't like have the part where you just wander around a town for 2 hours and like talk to every No, cut all that Give yourself like all the gear, all the armor, and you're just like faced off with a really cool boss. Not the final boss, but a really cool boss. Everything's there. You're going in, and then that's the demo. Don't make people wait through backstory. Yeah, that makes sense. And then my sort of follow-up question, and maybe this is more on the dev side, so maybe it's for the inside conferences, if you're doing that, then are you kind of developing on almost two games with your demo and your real game when you're getting feedback, or how are you balancing those two different experiences, I guess, when you get feedback? So, I know this is dev side stuff, but Yep. Um I do have a computer science degree, and I do know that if you can architecture your software right, you separate code from content, which is easier to say than to do. Hopefully, you can somehow architecture your code so that you can swap out the content into those. Again, I understand it is easier for me to say that than to do it, but the successful devs can just kind of like toggle that. But don't ask me any more than that. I'm not a dev. I am not a designer. No, super helpful just to know that context to be thinking about a demo as a little bit of a separate experience. I think that's that's a really good tip that I'll be thinking about. Um going circling back to our our Butterscotch Shenanigans kind of idea cuz it's related to demos, they had talked about on their podcast, and I was just curious if you had seen this kind of change in data. So, they were saying that with Crashlands 2, in Next Fest, they had a big spike during Next Fest, and it was like really good. Uh and that was kind of it. And then their most recent Next Fest experience with How Many Dudes, it was a little bit lower experience during the Next Fest than Crashlands 2, but they hit the top 50 demos afterwards, and that was like the biggest spike of all. So, is there And they were sort of expressing they felt like maybe because Next Fest is so well known now, that it's a little harder to get as much exposure, but that if you can hit that top 50, then maybe it's better than it's ever been. Is that something you're seeing? Yeah, so I've been following Next Fest and tracking data where I I a lot of my data comes from I put out a survey. I say like, "How did you do in Next Fest?" People send me their wish lists, and I just go get this data. So, I've been tracking it basically since the first or second Next Fest. I can't remember. Uh so, I've got like 5 or 6 years of data cuz the first Next Fest, I think it was like 2020 or 2021. It was like a COVID response. So, I've got the data for years. And basically, what happened, and we are we might talk about this in the thing. And they've shared with me their data for Next Fest. I asked them. I was like, "I heard your podcast." They gave me their data. What happened, and this is kind of weird, and we have to be very specific about the numbers. What they were talking about were the number of impressions. And what happened, and I did an analysis October Um okay, so let's see. It was October 2024, and the one just before that was What's the one that just before? What? June. June 2024 was an abnormally huge year in the number the amount of impressions they gave out, okay? And I believe Crashlands 2 was in the most awesome Next Fest that there's been where they just were giving out visibility. And it was actually very lopsided to top-tier games. And I think Crashlands Crashlands 2 was in the top tier. And I think Valve was like, "Whoa, whoa, time out. Time out. That's too much visibility. We gave it too much visibility. It benefited the top tiers too much." And so they cranked it back. In October, the very next Next Fest in my data, I can see they cranked it way back. And simultaneously, Next Fest October 2024 was an abnormally full year for some reason. I don't know why. 3,000 people did October 2024. Uh which was abnormally huge. And so they reworked their algorithm. I think October 2024 was the first year they did this machine learning algorithm where you get visibility 2 days and long. And Octo- if you look at it, there's a huge divot in October 2024. It was just like they got the algorithm wrong. They got the algorithm wrong. And so a lot of games are like, "Man, it's terrible." And then the next one, you could tell algorithms kind of changed a little bit and they cranked it back up and it was it's rising again where every year is back up to the numbers. Now, if you look at Here's what we we've determined is what what um Crashlands and I'm going to talk to the devs. I I just saw this all in the data and I haven't talked to them cuz I I haven't talked to them about the data that I found. But what my theory is is that last one, June 2024 where they did Crashlands 2, huge number of impressions. They basically both years, both with How many dudes in Crashlands 2? They got basically the same number of wishlists from Next Fest, which was about 15,000 wishlists. But on Crashlands 2, the number of impressions were huge. Like 10 times as much. Wow. And but And what this means to me is same number of wishlists, but Crashlands 2 had very high impressions. And so they were thinking, "Man, we just don't get as many impressions anymore. This sucks." But me, being an optimist and a weirdo, said, "Actually, the algorithm was tuned to better distribute the impressions. So when you think about it, one out of 10 people saw Crashlands 2 and was like, "That's my game. I'm going to wishlist it." But now the algorithm has tuned so that it's more directed. It's like a laser beam. Whereas before it was just a giant like flashlight shining visibility on everybody. Now it's a laser beam. And so it's a much more effective algorithm now. So their their wishlist rate is the the views to wishlist rate is much higher as a percentage. And so it looks their their first take was like, "Oh my god, we're not getting any impressions." But it was really it was no, it was more concentrated. So anytime, folks, and this is this is the thing. It's always more complicated than Reddit says or the YouTube videos like there's a guy like this and he's like, "I didn't get any wishlists." And then you dig into the data and you look at all this analysis and trend lines and all this stuff. It's a How long did that take me to explain all that? A lot. That's a much deeper conversation than a Reddit comment or YouTube video, which is why you just don't freak out, people. Do the numbers. Do the math. Do some boring spreadsheets. And then we can look at why things are doing what they are. So did that answer your question? Yes, absolutely. Yeah. Thank you for climbing through all that data. Love Love a good mystery to be solved. I I heard that comment on our podcast and I was like, "That's interesting. I I wonder." And so I'm glad I got to ask you about it. So that was that was very cool. Um Kind of going backwards maybe just a little bit. You had mentioned content creators. Do you recommend people start reaching out to those creators as soon as their Steam demos live or is there any particular best time to get that part started? I would start reaching out um like a month month and a half before your demo's live on Steam. And you can do you can put your build in a weird state where you can send out a direct key or a direct link to the the build. It's like a beta branch. And you send that to content creators and just say, "Hey, we're going to launch the demo on this date." And give them a date and like, "Please don't We'd like you to play it. Please try and time your video a couple days before. Just just consider this. It's not like an embargo. You're just like content creators sometimes like to know those dates cuz they're like, "Actually, I like this game." And the guy said that he likes to see the video come out cuz that's when he's launching. I'll do that. And they just like to know their timing cuz they're scheduling stuff out so they have to know when that schedule is. So I would reach out to them a month or so ahead. Because again, remember that schedule I said they've got a little schedule. Videos in the pipeline that have been edited, finished, and they're just slowly rolling them out. So yes, month and a half before. Okay. Do you think it's ever worth it for a small dev to do an embargo? Um Yeah, like like what I said was basically embargo. It's a soft embargo. It's not like, "I'm going to sick my lawyers at you." You just It's What I say by a soft embargo is just like, "Hey, we're launching our demo. It'd be really great. You'd really help us out if you could just launch your demo your video of our demo on this date." It's not like if it comes out a month or a week of before, it's not like you're going to like sick the lawyers on them. You're just like, "Come on. It would really help us out." So don't don't get too crazy, kids. Yeah. Uh Fender from the Discord was curious if a small game could be successful without reaching out to streamers. Uh if your game is super pretty. Like if your game it looks amazing. Like really, really pretty. Um but uh I don't I don't know why you wouldn't want to. Like the way it happened so you'll sometimes Okay, so I don't know how to answer this, Mr. Fender. Um here's what happens. And this is I see this all the time in the data that I'll I'll scrape on Steam. You'll see a couple games that you'll always hear these people they go, "Oh, my game failed at launch, but then it took off later." And they're like, "Oh, really? What happened?" And it was the content creators found it after launch and the person didn't do outreach ahead of time. And so what the game looked like and there was like a Korean game that was launched in Korean only. It's called Terminus Zombies. [laughter] It was only launched in Korean. And for the first like 6 months it had nothing and then they translated to English and then streamers found it, content creators, and then it just rocketed up. And people are like, "See, you don't need to have wishlists at launch." But that's looking at the opportunity cost because they could have if they had done a proper outreach and and shopped it ahead of time, they would have benefited from all the things that you're paying for with your 30% of money to Valve. You are paying for popular coming, new and trending, launch discovery queue, all this visibility. And so if you're paying for that, you want to get content creators to play it ahead of time so that it's there ready so that when you launch, you pick get picked up by the algorithm. If you wait and you don't do content creator outreach and you launch your game, you are paying Valve 30% for nothing. Like why? It's like if you went to an all you eat all you can eat buffet and you just got a lettuce salad and you just put like one crouton and you paid like $60 to get to an all you can eat buffet and you went and you're like, "No, I don't want the lobster. No, I don't want that sirloin steak. I just want one crouton placed on a piece of lettuce." That's what you're essentially doing. Is you're saying, "Well, I'm not going to reach out to content creators. My game can do it on its own. I'm just going to launch without content creators." So I think you should reach out to content creators cuz that'll get you wishlists, which then gets you triggered in the algorithm, which makes that 30% that Valve takes worth it. Um And the other reason is like I said earlier, it just takes time for content creators because it's just a slow they have their own pipelines. And then the benefit is when somebody else plays, their friend sees that they did well with their numbers with your game. And so their friend plays it and then their content creator friend plays it. It's a slow roll. So I just do it, please. I want your games to succeed. So please do marketing, folks. Do it. Do it. Yeah, that's such a helpful way to look at it of like you're paying for this in that 30%. I think because it's happening after, we can kind of detach ourselves from that reality. So that's a really helpful framework. Yeah. You're paying money for it. So much money. So much money. That's a 30%. It's a lot. [laughter] Yep. Yeah, I wonder if also a part of that is either just a fear of rejection or fear of not knowing. Bingo. Yeah. And bingo. Yeah. And so guys, put your game out there. You're going to have to You're going to have to have somebody yell at you, okay? Somebody's going to leave a nasty comment that says this game sucks. Learn it. Embrace the darkness. That's what you got to do. Yeah. To to maybe help alleviate these fears, do you maybe have a a sample content creator email or is have you talked to any creators and what they're looking for? Is there is there anything I need to put in my email to them to maybe entice them to play? Just make it short, folks. I All these comments and you probably you probably know people when they post questions, the question is like this long. It's like blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah. All this stuff. Just say like, "I have a cool All it is I have a game that you would like. It's a this genre plus this genre or whatever. Uh here's a link to the Steam page. Demo's up. Just play it. If you need more content, here's a link to my Dropbox that has trailers, screenshots, capsule art, all that stuff. That's essentially it. And then a snazzy title um that's eye-catching. Put a couple emojis in there. That's it. The best thing is look up Wanderbots. He has a really good blog. Search Wanderbots blog how to reach out to content creators. He has a couple sample letters. But really, it's like one or two sentences. It's I'm making this game. It's got a demo live now. Love to have you play it. Launch date the demos going live on this date. Love to have you play it by that time. Like two to three sentences. All that I said two to three sentences and a link to it. And don't say don't say if you'd like a key come back to me and email me and I'll email you Nope. Just put the key in there or if the demo's live put the link to the page with the demo live. That's Don't make it too hard. And no no text this is big. Take all that text throw it into an AI and say make this one sentence. That's what you do. If you really cannot help yourself and you can't write this long. Yeah, do you have a recommended number of content creators you think a small game should reach out to and what would be reasonable conversion rate on those that people could expect? I talked to a professional content creator person who used to work for Devolver. Clara Sia. I think she runs her own agency. Look, I don't know if she still is. Look her up. Clara Sia. And I was talking to I for my one of my previous Inside conferences which you can get for the full thing for $70. I think it's $50 if you want one conference, but if you want all of them $20 more. She I interviewed just Clara Sia for a whole hour plus of how to reach out to content creators. I said Clara how many content creators do we need to reach out to? And she said for a typical campaign I will do 300 outreaches to 1,000. And then you're you're good if you get like three people to play your demo. Wow. That's what it is. It's a numbers game and you're just ripping through it. 300 to 1,000. That's what a professional in this industry does. Wow. Okay. Yeah, that's I think those are the those are the mindset shifts you have to make. Yeah. You you're just the difference folks between a professional indie who has had hit games and not is they just do so much more than a typical indie. Like I like an indie that does not succeed never put their trailer up. Never reached out to content creators. They don't have different screenshots. They didn't do that thing where I'm like you know, write down every second of a trailer and and diagram it. The professionals that you think do it effortlessly, they work so much harder than you. They just work so hard. They reach out to 300 to 1,000 content creators. They diagram things. They play every demo at Next Fest. Let me tell you folks, when I talked to content these hit devs, I was like, how did you come up with that feature? And I was like, we didn't. We played every single demo on Steam Next Fest and we took notes and we compared notes and we played these games. We played the all these games. Every game. They play more games than you. They reach out to more content creators than you. They do just more behind the scenes, but they make it look effortless because you don't see how many content creators they reached out to or how many demos they played. You're just not doing enough of the research like intake. You need to intake more. Yeah, this kind of triggers a thought for me. I'm just curious what you would say, but I I recently worked on a little video called like luck versus skill in game dev and I referenced Aramis has I think a healthy philosophy of like being successful is like rolling a D20 on Steam, but if you email 1,000 content creators then you get to roll like 1,000 D20s. So do you think there's any percentage of luck on success on Steam or is it mostly skill slash hard work? How much do you think luck is involved? Do do you know about input versus output randomness? Have you heard about that? I've heard this. I don't remember the difference between the two. I can never remember which one's input which one's output, but there's there's like Slay the Spire where you get like four cards and it's like, oh, how do you deal with this? That's I think input randomness. Output randomness I believe is like I attack and then I randomly get a chance at crit or like 20% damage. That's output randomness I believe. Anyway. I believe in luck of input randomness which is like the cards you're dealt. Like were you born in a country that has the wherewithal and it's a peaceful country where you can build video games. And do you have a mathy artsy brain that can actually make this? Cuz some people just cannot make games cuz their brain isn't built for making games. Did you have a brother? For some reason so many brother teams make games. I don't know why. I did not have a brother. So I don't know. I I I did not get that roll of the dice. I love my sisters, but I wonder how different my life would be if I had a brother. Um All those are input randomness. But here's my here's my hot take is the problem with indie games is not visibility. That's my that's my thing is I do not think that there is a lack of visibility on Steam. The reason it is so hard to do this is because it is so hard to make games. Um and here's the thing is like your game is seen and it is played. If you put it up on itch, if you put your demo out, if you reach out to even a few content creators, they see it. And people I I've I heard that interview with Aramis and he's like, man, if only this content creator had had played my game. You know what? There's always going to be like if you reach out to 1,000 you're always going to get some some content creator is going to play it. Somebody will if your game is good. But if your game's not good I'll tell you content creators look at every game. They really do. And there are devs or players on Steam who are nut jobs that play every game. No matter how bad it looks or how janky, they will play it. But these people are like they love being the first person to identify that a game was a hit and they use that as a totem like I played Slay the Spire before anybody knew about it. Those nut jobs are out there and if they see they play your game. They will play it. And if they like it and they think it's good, they will tell all their friends and they will become a champion. So my theory is which I cannot prove all games are seen. It's just the good ones are the ones that get word of mouth, content creators playing it, just the algorithm kicking, all that stuff. Your game is seen. It's just people didn't like what they saw. And that's hard. That is very hard. And that's why I say you just got to make more games. You just got to make more more games because the the limiting factor is not visibility. I know it's hard to say that. It's skill and market fit. Like the game was fun and it's culturally relevant. That's better That's better than saying you know, um uh market fit is saying culturally relevant. Um it's it fits the zeitgeist. It's it's cultural. It's fun. It's good. It's got decent code. It's not janky or janky enough. And that just takes skill. That is such a hard thing to do. And so you devs, you just have to make more games because you got to get your skills up. Most devs just aren't good enough at making games and that's why it feels like, oh, it's a marketing problem. You got to get more games under your belt to get good at this. That's the thing. Yeah, thanks for sharing that. I'm I'm definitely buying what you're selling. Good. I I like that theory. $55. That's what I'm selling. $55 Inside conference. You already bought it. You're still buying it. So you literally are buying what I'm selling, but everybody else down below. Inside conference. Yep. All right, I have just a couple questions to wrap up and I'll let you get back to that Inside conference. Thank you. Do uh you have any thoughts especially in these small games on how to price it and how to discount it? I don't I don't know. And my general thought is you get out the old pencil and spreadsheet and you write well, you type it. Do it on a spreadsheet. All the games that are similar to yours, genre, graphic style, depth write them all out. Write out the price. Find the average mean where it is. Reviews cross reference that with reviews and player sentiment and then price your game 20% higher than the average. Uh because you only sell your game on discount and indies are selling their game for too cheap. I've literally graphed this out. Look, search price are indie games too cheap and they are because if you look at the even in without calculating inflation, the average price of an indie game has gone like this. Whereas the average price of a triple-A game has gone like this. Um so you should be pricing your games a little bit higher. And guess what? Nobody wants to hear this, but if you if somebody does not complain that your game is too expensive, you have underpriced your game. Just by the laws of supply and demand because half of people will have to say this game is too expensive because that's supply and demand. [laughter] Yep. That makes sense. Jer Bob who was a fellow guest on the podcast and is in the Discord Thanks Bob. wondering he's wondering if there is anything a first-time dev needs to focus on for post-launch and is there any do you think there's any helpful marketing that can be done after a game or is it kind of like once you hit that big push, your game is your game? Your game's your game. Um I looked at the numbers all the games that launched in 2024. I'm actually giving this talk. This is when you buy your $50 pass to Inside conference. I'm doing a talk that is what to do with your game post launch. Great setup, Jabob. Um but here's the thing. I did a This talk is built on research that I did of the 2024 games, the whole class of games that launched in 2024 because we have enough time. If I looked at just the class of 2025, some of those games have launched in December of 2025, so they've really only had like 6 to 7 months of data. Well, well, what month are we in? Uh What what are we in? May, almost May. So, they only had about 5 months if you launched in December 2025. So, I scratch that. Let's just look at 2024. So, I looked at all the 2024 games, and there were only 25 games that came back from a failed launch. Only 25 games, okay? Out of 20,000. Wow. Basically, one out of a thousand games will go from under 150 reviews in the first month. So, look at your first month. If you got under 150 reviews in that first month, you have a one in 1,000 chance at later succeeding. That is not good, okay? My advice is if you did not reach 150 reviews in the first month, say see you later and start working on your next game. Don't spend any more time like Obviously, if there's a really bad bug and your game is really really broken, fix that so you get a good reputation. But other than that, move on as fast as you can to your next game. Now, what I would do is I would set You can go into the pricing tool and schedule all your discounts. Everybody, no matter what you do, whether you're a 150 review game or not, set all your discounts for the rest of life. You can do it for like a year, I think. But you schedule every single discount to hit every single month, every 30-day cool down you do another one. You do another one. Uh you use the tool to figure out when you can do your next discount. Do it. Takes like an hour to schedule your discounts for a year, and then say goodbye to that game and start working on your next one. You really You cannot fix a game. You Again, you have a one in 1,000 chance. And I looked at all those games, those 25 games that actually succeeded in 2024, and it was mostly because they didn't reach out to content creators beforehand. And so, they were a secretly good game, and even those, they didn't do that that great. And again, this is that opportunity cost. They could have done even better had they done their marketing ahead of time. But most of the one out of 1,000 just didn't do the content creator outreach. They didn't try and get that 7,000 wish list before launch. So, that is That is the state of play. You cannot come back from a failed launch. It's unfortunate. Well, Chris, this has been an absolute pleasure. Let me end you with one final question. So, it's going to be a little bit interesting asking you this one. So, this is the Dev Dream Podcast, and I created it to inspire myself mostly, but also others by hearing what cool devs have going on. So, I normally end with asking them what their game dev dreams are. Um so, for you, uh in whatever that might look like since you're not making a game, maybe it's marketing or maybe it's helping other people, do you have any dreams in this season of life related to game dev? I don't. I just I'm super happy. I love what I'm doing. This is so fun. I'm living the dream. I'm living the dream. This is fun. I like it. Um I I don't know. I just think it's it's a good time, like a golden age. You know, I One thing I didn't ask You didn't ask me about the golden age, you know, this golden age thing. I heard a couple podcasts, and you said gold rush. And I just want to I want to I want to put a fine point on this one last thing. I heard in a couple podcasts you said Chris Zukowski called this a gold rush. Uh it's not a gold rush. I just want Here's my dream. It's to get this term right for everybody. [laughter] I consider it a golden age, which means it's a good thing for creators, where it's like, hey, this is a positive thing for people cuz it's a golden age. It's We're all doing better. Not Not everybody gets it, but there are enough creators. It's a good thing for creators, people creating things. A gold rush is good for people who are like sneakers, and they come in and they're just trying to come in and jam out a a a scheme to to rush in there and it's a speculative. So, I just want to really be careful with anybody who says gold rush versus golden age. Uh where I I do think this is a golden age. And so, this leading this back to my comment about what my dream is is like, I want people to be happy. As And And the reason I write this stuff is it is possible to do this, and that's why I call it a golden age, is that that that the tools and the barrier are low, not for everybody, but if you follow the zeitgeist, the culture, and you make the right type of game, um and you market it using the basic strategy that I talk about so much, I really believe that there's a better chance. Not everybody's going to do it. It still depends on you being good at making games, but it's possible. And I know lots of people. This Inside conference, I had to say no to people, not because they didn't have a hit game in a short period of time. It's just like I I didn't have much time. There's like after 10 speakers, it's like a little too much. There's so many people doing this. And my my dream is for people who stick with it, work hard, learn the system, can quit their boring job that they hate. That's my dream, is that people can find action in this golden age that we're in and can be the masters of their own destiny. So, I My dream is for all of you to do well. And the the main thing is don't be too bitter. Like And don't spend so much time on Reddit cuz Reddit is so bitter. I don't know why they're so grumpy on Reddit. Um and so, I want you to be positive, and I want you to try hard, and really study the numbers, and don't get discouraged if your first game doesn't do it. It takes lots of games to do this. You just have to keep trying and trying.