Article title: Your Indie Game Is Probably Too Normal
Author/Speaker: Payne Robinson
Date: 2026/08
Source Url: https://youtu.be/R-WE-lAlj7o?si=QkKIWr4cLtQsRzTH

Today we're going to talk about how you need to make your games weird and fresh because that's what wins on Steam. All right, on the real though, I usually start talking about Execute and being like, "Hey, check it out. Execute crushed paid off my student loans. Obviously, I did something right, but I did it one time. So, you can't really fully trust me because there was definitely some luck involved. So, what the heck are you doing here now? What do I have to say?" Well, me and every other indie dev person on the internet is trying to figure out how to answer this question for you. That's why people are watching our channels because we made a game that sold. And everyone else is like, "Hey, I'm looking to make a video game, sir. Can you please tell me how to do it properly so that I can also sell games and have a fun time like you are having?" And we are like, "Yeah, I guess." And so we all have our theories about why things work and why they don't work, but they're all theories. So I'm going to try to break what the other people are saying because I feel like most people on indie YouTube are relatively conservative. They say things like follow the trends and copy what is working and change a little bit. Now, I have a whole video on copying and what I like to do. You can check that out. But this is common advice. Copy something, change it a little bit. Incremental games are big. Node busters are nice. Make your own node buster. Reskin it. That is common advice. But we also see this. Don't make things that are too weird because people won't understand them. Don't mix together too many genres. Don't get too crazy. Be crazy, but be crazy on something that we know works, right? But what if I want to make weird things? And that's my point at this point. And I feel like lots of indie dev right now is, hey, go make an incremental game. Go make friends slop. Go make whatever trend is happening right now. Follow that trend. Change it a little bit. Profit. That is fine. If you are making games to make money, go do that. That's not why I am here. I am making games because I would like to make something that I am proud of and that I have fun playing. When I made execute the first time when this thing came out, I was and still am proud of it. But I did not make it because incremental games are big. I made it because I was trying to make a small scoped game and I like playing in incremental games. This game medium rare. This is a weird game that is a lot more risky. I don't know any dungeon crawlers that are really successful right now. I don't know any turn-based games besides giant AAA ones like Clare Obscure. I guess that's indie-ish that are successful. So, I'm taking a risk here by doing this, right? By making a game like this. This is not the normal advice. The normal advice would have been, hey, turn this into an auto battling incremental game. Turn this into a roguelike. This is not a roguelike. This is an extraction game. So, we are not following any of the traditional pieces of advice. But that's my job here on this channel is to try things out and see if they work and then tell you about it. Now, where's my credibility? Well, it's right here. That game that I just showed you, it did 2,000 wish lists in a week and it did another 3 to 400 the week after. And that first 2,000 wish list was just from posting our trailer. And you might be like, "Hey man, you have a huge YouTube channel. It's probably because you posted on your YouTube channel and everybody wishlisted it." I wish that was the case. I think some of you wishlisted it, but only 7% of the people that visited the page, not just wishlisted it, but this is 7% of the people that So, we only got 286 people to actually visit the page directly from a link on YouTube. We did have 1500 people visit the page by typing the name in, but that's still only 40% of our traffic. We also did not have any real coverage from the Steam algorithm. What happened was our trailer, we posted it, people saw it. They ended up writing articles about it. There's lots of articles in Japan. There's articles all over the world. You can Google medium rare. It will come up with lots of pictures of steak, but you'll be able to find some articles in there. People started writing about this because back to the thesis of this video, it looks weird and it seems fresh. I saw in the comments people are like, "Wow, this looks crazy. What is this?" I also saw in the comments, "Hey, I've never seen a first person turn-based game before and weird and fresh." And I think we often forget as indie developers, we're here to entertain people. When we're often thinking of this question here, the one that we started out with, how do we make good game? How do we make good game? How do we do it? What do people want? Oh my god, I don't know. It's almost like we forget that we are also people that play video games. And you can just ask yourself, what do I want to play? That's what I did when I made this. I said, man, it'd be really cool to play a game with 3D rasterized graphics and also realtime graphics that have been rasterized and chopped down to a frame rate like they do in the animated Spider-Man movies. And also, if it was turn-based, but also kind of like Resident Evil and Witchfire, I would really like to play a game like that. And often times I've heard devs be like, "Hey, that's a bad idea when you mix together all your favorite things into one thing and then you make some giant overscoped mess." Yes, that is a bad idea. But because I've made a few games, I've made a few small scoped games. I've shipped them. We were able to make medium rare into something that is small scoped. That's part of why we picked it. But we are getting inspired by all these other things in an effort to make something weird and fresh. Now, hey, Pain, cool. Your game worked out. It's weird. It's fresh. Fair enough, I guess. But like, I don't really see how that happens. Like, Hades is really huge and Binding of Isaac is weird, I guess. But it's still a roguelike. Like, what do you mean weird and fresh? People aren't really doing that and making money on Steam, are they? Well, let's take a look here. This is Hylics. People were pointing to this a lot when they were talking about our art style. Hylics had way more reviews than Execute. This came out a while ago. This is an old game, so it probably did well before, but this is an RPG done in a really interesting style. And I would say that it is weird. It stood out. A lot of people bought it because of how weird it is. Like, man, that's old. All right. Do you have any new examples? This is newer. 2021 Cruelty Squad. This did very well. It looks like a first person shooter, but the HUD is crazy. The graphics assault your eyes, and the game play and the way that you play things is not normal. You reload by holding down the right mouse button and moving your mouse back and forth. It does not play properly, but it did very well because it is fresh and new and entertaining. What I mean by this, when I keep repeating it, weird and fresh and new and entertaining. What you want is when people even just see your trailer, even when they see your thumbnail, you want them to go, "Oh my god, I need to go see what that is." And then they go to your Steam page and wishlist it. If your game doesn't make people go, whoa, you're not doing it right in my opinion. And to do that right, it's weird. Plus fresh. We'll talk about different ways of doing it. Here are some more examples. This one, just this most recent. It's not even out yet, but this is going to cook. This thing just crushed the most recent Nextfest. This is an incremental game, but I don't even think it out. Yeah, here it is. A meaningless random numbers is an incremental horror game. Incremental horror. Weird. Fresh. I don't think I've played that many incremental horror games. This destroyed everyone in NextFest. This is not the incremental game that everybody else is making. I've seen lots of people making incremental games that are straight up copies of other things. This I what even is happening on the screen right now? As soon as I saw even this meaning this random numbers, a gun at a fish. Also, what is what's up with fish lately, man? People are just being really mean to fish lately. But I had to click on it. I had to play it. This is weird and fresh and entertaining and all of the graphics are nuts. The thing is here now we're going to get to creating this stuff like all right pain. Fine. It's weird and fresh. You think I can make this? You paint. Do you think I can make this type of art that you're making? I can't even make a 3D model. Pain, what are you talking about here? Do you think I could draw that tunnel that you're making? Well, let's take a look at Hylics for a quick sec. If you look at Hylics, if you don't know what rasterization is, that's kind of what we did. Rasterization is when you take a picture of something. So in Hylic's case, person made stuff out of clay. I guarantee you most of you could make this shape out of clay, which is you can see that's what happened here. Then he took a picture of it. Then he went into Photoshop and he cut it out. And then he put the picture in his computer. And then he lowered the resolution. And then he took all the colors and forced them into a color palette and then he dithered them. So he didn't draw almost any of this on here. He used the computer to compress it so it looks like it's video game art. And that's what they've been doing for years. That is a technique that I used to also make medium rare. That is the same technique that we saw over here with meaningless random numbers. Often times when you see people who are making stuff that's weird and fresh. this game. None of these textures match. It almost feels like the people who were making this were like, "Dude, screw it. We're never gonna make the next Call of Duty. Let's just get a bunch of wood. I don't even care if they repeat. Let's just slap them on there. Let's make it." A lot of indies and a lot of our power is in the fact that we can make really fun and interesting games by breaking the rules. Let's talk about modernism and postmodernism. You'll see what I mean. I drew this before, but we've got to do a new one. Oh, no. Let's do it. Oh, flashbang. Oh my god. Ow, my eyes. Jesus. Dear Lord. Okay. All righty. So, what the heck is going on? This is where I might lose some of you, but I don't even care. This is professor time. Okay. We've got modernism and postmodernism 5. Pretend like that says postmodernism. Modernism means new or now. Postmodernism means after modernism or after now or after new. We are in a post-modern age right now where we have for a long time we've had video games were new. We've built them up. We have all of these genres and I look at genres as shapes, right? We know how to make lots of different genres. Like this is a cube. We know how to make a cube. It's a square. You draw some lines. You connect the lines. And if you connect the lines properly, it ends up making a cool looking 3D cube. We know how to make a platformer. We know how to make an incremental game. We know how to make a first-person shooter. This is modernism. Wow, cool. We know how to make these shapes. And if you want to do a really cool take on modernism, this is a modernist type indie game. To make modernist video games, you need to have lots of skill and lots of time. This guy's got a lot of skill. He can draw lots of really great art. So then he can take this old form of a turn-based RPG, draw lots of great art, and then he can innovate on it. he can add on to it. This does not have a world map like most RPGs would of this style. It just has one hub that you come back to and you upgrade over time and as you upgrade it you the story expands. And so they have innovated on that genre. They have drawn the cube and then they have added an extra dimension to the cube and it's wow this is like cube but with extra dimension. It's got shadow now. Wow. Cube. Cool. With a shadow. That's modernism. That's how you innovate in a modernist way. Postmodernism. That's what this is kind of. That's what this aesthetic is. This is definitely postmodern. And this is definitely postmodern. This postmodern is breaking the rules. It's changing things. So, if I were to do a postmodern cube, let's start with a small example. How we do a postmodern cube? Well, first we would go cube. There we go. I just drew a cube. This is the same as this, but I've changed the form. I've broken the rules. You expected me to draw a cube somehow. Maybe you expected me to draw the cube with spray paint, but instead I wrote the word cube. I have subverted your expectations and presented this shape in a new way that is interesting. That's what these do. Okay, this is still about making numbers go up. This still has a prestige system, but the way that you make the numbers go up is completely crazy and broken. You're shooting fish. You're hanging out with anime characters that are actually perks. You are sinning. You are killing I think single mothers. Is that what it is? Yeah. A mother of two. This is crazy. You are completely breaking the rules. But still we still are adhering to the original form of cube. We're still adding to this. Right. So postmodern in this era postmodern is an indie dev's best way to make something weird and fresh which is our original goal. Make something weird and fresh and you will win. Make something that people see and they go, "Wow, I want to wishlist that." And not only wishlist that, but tell people about it. That is our goal right now. Make something that not only excites you, but excites everybody who sees it. That is the whole point of doing any of this. Why would you even spend so much time making a video game if you weren't excited about what you were building, right? Okay. So, yeah, go make weird things, I guess. I hope this helps you genuinely get your head out of your butts. Quit making stuff you don't even like to play.
